The A-Z of Quant
27 August 2004
Inside
Building a Quant model,
Macquarie sgle
The search for factors
Factor selection
Building the model
Portfolio simulations
Appendicies
Analysts
Richard Lawson
(612) 8232 4391
richard. lawson@macquarie.com
George Platt
(612) 8232 6s3e
george. platt@macq uarie. com
3
4
7
23
32
43
Building a Quant model,
Macquarie style
Quant: the numbers work for you
Stock prices change for a multitude of reasons and these reasons vary over
time and economic conditions. This makes it more difficult to outperform your
chosen benchmark. Quant models are a great way to systematically capture
the multi{imensionality of the market. In this report, we show how the
Macquarie Research Quantitative Team builds multi-factor Quant models
that work.
Superior factor selection
We require factor signals to have:
1. Meaning - financial, economic and/or behavioural underpinnings
2. Significance - based on various statistical tests
3. Stability - through time and across stock groupings
A combination of lC analysis, lC decay profiles, fractiles and pure factor
returns yield superior analysis of factor predictability and stability than
traditional regression based approaches only.
Optimally combining correlated factors
Many return factors are highly correlated. So how do you combine them into
a model that is optimal while limiting the risk of double counting correlated
factors? We have developed a sophisticated technique to construct multi-
factor models that produces befter results!
Constructing realistic portfolios
We demonstrate how we construct portfolios with real life constraints, such
as limiting active bet size, limiting exposure to risk factors, liquidity
constraints and transaction costs.
Please rcler to the disclaimer and d,sc/osure on page 66 of this document.
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
This page has been left blank intentionally
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
1. Searching for factors
2. Selecting and testing
factors
3. Combining factors
4. Constructing
portfolios
Building a Quant model,
Macquarie style
Welcome to the Macquarie's A-Z of Quant The purpose of this report is to give a serious
overview of the many quantitative techniques we use to construct and simulate quantitatively
styled portfolios at Macquarie
In Section One, we explore just what factors are, how Quants use factors and how they are
constructed. In particular, we discuss what we look for in desirable factors, as well as some of
the pitfalls in constructing factors.
Section Two then discusses many of the quantitative techniques we use to select the factors
that end uo in the final multi-factor model. These include various univariate tests like rank lCs,
lC decay profiles and fractiles, as well multivariate tests (pure factor returns).
Section Three examines how to combine those factors that have made it through the tests
we described in Section Two. In particular, we examine how to optimally combine correlated
factors. This is an important issue as many factors are highly correlated. lf factor correlation is
not taken into account you run the risk of double counting similar type factors that are both
highly correlated and successful, while risking the under utilisation of other successful factors.
Lastly, Section Four discusses the more technical side of constructing optimised portfolios.
Here we take your Alpha model, together with an appropriate risk model, and optimise
through time with our in-house optimiser. lt has the advantage of imposing real-life constraints
such as limiting active bet size, limiting exposure to risk factors, liquidity constraints and
transaction costs.
trectir" one- |sectbn rwcl l=ectfi rhr;l
lThesearchtor l+l Factor l+l Buildingthe F---+
lfactots I lselection I lmooet I
Various Appendiccs are also included dealing with various other quantitative issues from
dealing with data, in- and out-of-sample testing and portfolio construction techniques.
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repod The A-Z of Quant
Factors = information
about a company that
can be measured
D iffe re nt factor g ro u p s
Factor performance
varies over time
3. Momentum factors
4 Forecast revisions
The search for factors
What are factors?
Factors embody information about a publicly listed company. They could be characteristics of
the company, the company's share price performance or vital statistics of an analyst's
company model. A factor may change as relevant new information arrives about a listed
company, which may in turn be accompanied by a change in the share price. Factors might
therefore be used to predict future stock price returns.
Information separates active managers from passive managers. Information,
properly applied, allows active managers to outperform their informationless
benchmarks (Grinold & Kahn, 2000, P315).
But stock prices change for a multitude of reasons, making it difficult to capture without the
use of quantitative techniques:
Multi-factor Quant models can be developed to capture the different systematic
driverc of stock prices.
Multi-factor models, as the name suggests, comprise of a number of stock price signals
known as factors. Factors, as the embodiment of information, form the core of any
quantitative investment strategy. The development and selection of factors is the important
first step in building a quantitative return forecast model that works.
The Macquarie Quantitative Research Team has developed an extensive factor database that
allows for the construction and testing of factors within Asia Pacific equity markets. Some
examples of types of factors we use are:
1. Value factors eg dividend yield and price to earnings ratio
2. Profitability factors eg ROE and change in ROE
eg 1, 3 or 6 month price momentum
eg 1, 3 or 6 month changes in consensus EPS and DPS
5. Event driven factors eg lPOs, mergers and acquisitions, and earnings surprises
We call these factor groups. Factors within the same factor group are typically more highly
correlated than factors from two different groups. They also may belong to the same group
because they are constructed using a similar calculation methodology
As the above list demonstrates, some factor groups are related to historical company
performance or to future expectations of company performance (such as value, profitability
and economic factors). Other factors may be more behaviourally based (such as momentum
factors). Some factors are even related to the investor composition of equity markets, and
how equity markets work (eg event driven factors)'
The same factors do not always work throughout time and several types of factors may be
driving the market at the same time. They may even be working against each other, so that
when one factor is punished, another is rewarded This can make successful factor selection
and hence stock selection tricky.
ln this report, we will discuss how to construct Quant models that deal with these issues.
r a detailed discussion of some of the more mmmonly used factors.
4 27 Auoust 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
How do Quants use factors?
Factors are used to Quants use factors to predict relative returns of financial assets (in our case stocks). We
predict returns typically are interested in this on a cross-sectional basis. In particular, by comparing and
filtering stocks by the various factors that we believe predict relative stock returns, we end up
with stocks that have the most desirable characteristics. This relative returns framework
implicitly assumes a benchmark (ie an investible universe of stocks) against which fund
oerformance is measured.
The goal of active management is to outperform the appropriate benchmark with
as little risk as possible.
This then raises two ouestions:
1. What factors do we use in our Quant model?
2. How do you combine factors together into a model that outperforms your chosen
benchmark, with as little risk as possible?
Factors must In regard to the first question, we want factors that systematically signal outperformance but
systematically signal we don't want factors that by accident or coincidence seemed to have worked historically
outpeiormance, not (known as data mining). Factors that have worked by coincidence historically are unlikely to
work by coincidence add any value to the model.
Therefore, at Macquarie, we require candidate factors to have:
. Meaning - to be economically, financially or behaviourally justifiable or recognised as
systematic predictors of stock prices
. Significance - to have tested well (statistical significance) in both an in-sample and out-
of-sample period
. Stability - to have worked well through time and in different market conditions
Meaning, in particular, is the top level protection against data mining. By using factors that
have some theoretical rationale, based on the financial or behavioural biases that drive stock
prices, we ensure that the possibility of data mining is minimised For example, a factor based
on the number of employees of a listed entig is much more open to criticism than a factor
based on the share orice movement over the last three months
Significance and stabilig are the two other key prerequisites in selecting factors for the final
model. They embody the past ability of a factor to consistently predict share price
performance on a cross-sectional basis through time In the next section, factor screening, we
devote much time to quantitative techniques that help us sift for factors that actually exhibit
significance and stability2.By using the three criteria (meaning, significance, stability) we
hope to capture the significant drivers of equity markets in different economic conditions In
doing so we reduce the risk that our model won't perform in real life3.
Once we have our shortlist of factors, we can examine the second question posed above. ln
particular, we want to combine these factors into a model that proxies for the underlying
drivers of relative returns We do this in Section f hree, Building the model, where we discuss
the art and science of creatino the multi-factor model.
2 One other factor level check we like to use is whether a factor works across all equity markets. However, an
equally valid argument is that equity markets can differ significantly in terms of makeup, ownership and
constraints (eg developed markets versus emerging markets) This in turn might lead to qualitatively different
drivers ofthese markets Hence, we only use this as a check, ratherthan a requirement
t Performance of individual factors will typically change through time and in different economic conditions. This
may sometimes affect how stable the performance is of the multi-fuctor model. Multi-factor models should
therefore not be exoected to be correct 1 00% of the time but rather Doint us in the riqht direction
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repod The A-Z of Quant
Pitfalls in calculating
factors from raw data ...
How do you create and calculate factors?
As discussed above, factors need to have some financial or behavioural justification. Factor
creation is quite an art form and new ones are continually being developed and tested,
particularly as equity markets change and evolve. Factors we use at Macquarie typically have
their origin in some theoretical, academic and/or pragmatic background (for a list of factors
we have calculated, please contact us).
To calculate a factor typically raw data from various data sources needs to be turned into
meaningful factor signals. However, there are several possible pitfalls to factor calculation:
1. Matching across data sources: this is when factors use information from two or more
sources This is potentially problematic if the various data vendors use different core
information (eg if one vendor doesn't take into account a recent share dilution, resulting in
distorted number of shares or even share price).
2. Survivorship bias: this occurs when you don't include stocks in your database that have
since delisted or gone bankrupt. This will make your performance tests look better than
they really would have been at the time.
3. Look ahead bias: typically this problem arises with historical @mpany accounts data. lt
might take 2-4 months after a company year end (depending on the country) before a
company publicly releases its financial statements. lf a factor is calculated historically
using data in the 24 months between company year end and the company reporting
date, this will make your results look better than they really would have been.
4. Diluting per share data: forgetting to adjust per share data when various corporate
events occur, like rights issues, bonus issues and share splits, will distort the results and
introduce noise into your results.
Appendix 2, Dealing with data, discusses their issues in more detail as well as the issue of
normalisation, which allows different factors to be massaged into comparable, unitless
dimensions. This is essential before attempting to combine individual factors into a multi-
factor model.
Once meaningful factors have been created we need to test them for significance and
stability. This is the subject matter of the next section, Factor selection.
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Cross secfional
regressions can be
used to test factors
U n ivariate information
analysis is another
common method
Factor selection
Before any multi-factor model can be built, a screen for candidate factors is conducted. ln
particular, we desire to screen for those factors that show significance and stability of
predicting stock performance on a cross-sectional basis throughout history (time). There are a
variety of ways of doing this.
One popular method for determining what the return drivers in any market might be is a
cross-sectional regression based approach, on a univariate basis (univariate means one
factor at a time). Here, stock returns one month fonruard are regressed against the factor
exposures of individual stocks the previous month (with the stock exposures being in
normalised data form: see Appendix 2 for further details). The regression is performed each
month across the universe of stocks to give a time series of regression coefficients (or factor
returns) Comparing the t-stats of these regression coefficients for different factors enables us
to see what factors have been the statistically significant drivers of performance through time.
The factors selected for the final model are those that have statistically significant regression
coefficients over time. lt is hoped that by selecting only those factors that have been
statistically significant in the past, we are selecting factors that have predictive power of
cross-sectional stock returns for the future
Another common method is a univariate information analysis approach (again on a cross-
sectional basis) Here, we conduct a broad range of comparative tests designed to assess the
different dimensions of factor performance, namely significance and stability, as we discussed
on the previously. The tests we conduct of univariate information analysis are:
1. Monthly time series of information coefficients (rank lCs)
2. lC decay profiles
3 Fractiles
Again, the hope is that those factors that have tested well here will continue working into the
future (indeed research has confirmed a certain amount of autocorrelation in factor signals).
At Macquarie, we use both approaches in our factor selection methodology. However, we
typically conduct a univariate information analysis as the first factor screen, after which we
then conduct regressions for each successfully screened factor while controlling for various
risk factors (often referred to as a pure factor return).
In this section, we will be examining both the univariate tests (information analysis) as well as
the multivariate test (pure factor returns).
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Univariate tests
1. Monthly time series of information coefficients (Rank lCs)
lCs are based on the Monthly lCs are a straightforward way of ascertaining the predictive capability of a factor in
correlation of forvvard the past. They are similar to the factor returns (regression coefficients) of a univariate
returns againstfactor regression of forward returns against individual stock exposures. In fact, monthly lCs are also
scores calculated usino forward returns and factors scores. \Mile the calculation methods of both
are different, OJtn factor returns and lCs give us an idea of the relative success of individual
factor strategy (ie an investment strategy based around selecting stocks with high factor
scores).
lCs are cross-secflona I To calculate the lCs for monthly data, we cross-sectionally rank each stock's factor score as
at the end of one month, as well as rank the subsequent month's total return for each stock.
We do this for all stocks within the required universe Note the one month lag between the
factor scores and the monthly total returns. So if the stock's factor exposures are as at 31-
Jan-04, the month returns are from 31-Jan-04 to 29-Feb-04. We then calculate the correlation
between the two sets of ranks.
A ranked lC therefore measures the predictive power of a factor by
looking at the correlation between the factor scores and subsequent
period's stock returns.
Ranked lC's are then calculated every month. lf a factor has no predictive power, we would
expect its lC on average to be zero, jumping unpredictably from month to month. On the other
hand, a ranked lC always equal to 1 (1OO%) indicates perfect forecasting skill4 lCs can range
from -100% to +100%.
Average lC should be Factors that are likely candidates for a multifactor model might have an average lC of above
over 4%o, preferably 4o/o, sa!, as long as they were consistently positive most of the time (ie are stable). In the
higher Australian equity market, some of the strongest factors have average ranked lCs of 8% to
12%.5 While the average factor lCs may be small, they must be reasonably stable over time
To ascertain stability we use two simple measures:
Factor stability over time 1. Twelve month rolling average
is also impoftant 2 t-stat of monthly lcs
Twelve month rolling average: lCs can be quite volatile over time. Therefore we take a 12
month rolling average and graph it. This allows us to visually examine the factor's predictive
stability over time.
A consistently positive 12 month average lC gives us confidence in a strategy. On the other
hand, a strategy where the average 12 month lC is positive half the time and negative the
other half is not likelv to make it into the model6.
' lCs can also be calculated using normallsed factor scores and the next month's actual retums However,
rankedlCsarearguablycleanerthannormalisedlCs Thisisbecausethedistributionofranksisflat,whereas
normalised factor scores can have large outliers that can substantially distort the results (noting that normalised
factor scores will typically be roughly normally distributed) Arguably, multi-factor models should be built using
normalised based lCs but because ranked lcs are typically highly correlated with normalised lCs, we use the
cleaner ranked lcs. Alternatively, we could build a composite rank model based on ranked lCs
s Wthin certain sectors of a market the averages can be significantly higher (eg up to 20% for listed property
trusts within Australia)
u On the other hand, a factor ranked lC that has a consistently negative 12 month rolling average lC might
imply an opposite strategy to what the factor score captures, For example, many developed equity markets
experience negative 12 month rolling average lCs for short term momentum This implies that mean reversion
(defined as the negative of one month momentum), might be a good factor to use. Of course, if there was no
intuitive reason for usino this factor this wav. it should be not be included in the model
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
12 month momentum
generates con si stently
strong lCs, while ...
... Consensus
recommendations do
not
Chart 1 and Chart 2 below contrast two different factors for the Australian equity market,
namely 12 month momentum and consensus recommendation. In particular, 12 month
momentum has a consistently strong 12 month rolling average lC over time, so it is far more
likely to make it into the final model than consensus recommendation.
Ghart 1: Twelve month momentum for S&P/ASX200 (Rank lcs)
4Oo/o
30%
20%
10%
Oo/o
-10%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-20o/o
-30%
-40%
Jan-95
Source: Maquaie Quantitative Research
Chart 2: Gonsensus necommendation for S&P/ASX200 (Rank lGs)
-10o/o
-20Vo
-3OYo
-4oo/o
Jan-96 Jan-97 Jan-98 Jan-99 Jan-00 Jan-01 Jan-02 Jan-03 Jan-04
Monthly
Twelve month momentum has strong predictive power in Australia.
4Oo/o
30%
2OYo
lOYo
Oo/o
-1Qo/o
-2OYo
-30%
40o/o
4Oo/o
30o/o
20o/o
lOYo
OYo
-10Yo
-20o/o
-3OYo
40%
Jan-95 Jan-96 Jan-98 Jan-99 Jan-00 Jan-01 Jan-02 Jan-03 Jan-04
MonthlY
Consensus recommendation has less predictor power than 12 month momentum
Source: Maquaie Quantitative Resarch
r--Rank lC -12m 
avg
r---'l Rank lC - 
12m avg
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
t-stat definition
f-sfaf > 2 provides
statistical significance
Beware factors that
generate prolonged
periods of
underper-formance!
t-stats: As mentioned above, lCs are like the factor returns (or regression coefficients) in a
univariate cross-sectional regression. And just as with univariate regressions, we can take the
t-stat of lCs to see if they are significantly different to zero' This is important as it gives us an
indication as to the stability or consistency of a factor strategy's predictive ability. A t-stat is
defined as:
t€tat(lC) = Average (lC) / Standard Deviation (lC) x {No. of Observations
The idea of the t-stat is that it rewards higher average lCs (the numerator) and punishes
higher standard deviations of lCs (the denominator) Also, for a given average and standard
deviation, the more observations we have the more confidence we have in the results for the
factor. Here the t-stat is proportional to the square root of the number of observations.
As a rough rule, a t-stat greater than +2 indicates that we can be very confident in the factor's
stability through time. But the closer the t-stat is to zero, the less confidence we have in a
factor's ability to add value.E
Other issues: lt should be noted that it is also preferable to see the lCs not working every
now and then, rather than not working over an extended time period. For example, it is
preferable to have a factor randomly misfiring in three out of every 12 months over a 4-year
period say, rather than not working for 12 months in a row. This detracts from confidence and
raises questions about why this factor is working and how temporary its usefulness could be.
Monthly lGs, the 12 month rolling average and the lC t-stat form a core part of
the factor selection process.
t t-stats are a statistical tool to measure if a distribution is likely to be statistically different from a particular
value lt is like a z-stat but is used when the standard error has to be estimated from the data. The formula is
basically a method for calculating the area under the normal curve (actually it is the t-distribution, which is very
similar) This area represents the probability of a statistic being greater than or less than a specific value
(otherwise known in statistics as hypothesis testing)
8 Similar to the comments on the previous page about a consistently negative 12 month rolling average lC, a
t-stat less than -2 implies an opposite strategy to what the fuctor score captures As long as there is an intuitive
rationale for this, this oooosite strateqv should be emDloved within the multifuctor model.
10 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Some factors exhibit
shoft term predictive
power, while others
work over longer
investment horizons
Factor lC decay profiles
involve
... lagging fhe sfocks
forward return
... and calculating the
average of the ICs for
each lagged return
Sample lC decay for 12
month momentum and
2. lC decay profiles
Equity markets react at different speeds to different types of new information. The faster the
market reacts to one type of information, the quicker we need to act to capitalise on this new
information. On the other hand, strategies based on information that gets quickly priced into the
market also tend to have higher tumover.
lC decay profiles measure how fast or how efficient the market is at pricing
in new information.
Using factors as the embodiment of information, we can then generate factor lC decay
profiles, as follows:
1. Calculate Series of Ranked lCs; First, for each lag n = I , 2, 3, .. 12 months, we
calculate a time series of ranked lCs based on the stocks forward return lagged by n
months relative to the factor signal In fact for n = 1 this is simply the lC monthly time
series as discussed in the section above.
2. Average each Ranked lC series: we then take the average of each lag's monthly lC time
series (where n = 1 , 2, 3, ... 12). Again, the average lC calculated for the one month lag
will actually be the average lC of the chart in the section above on monthly time series of
information coefficients.
In Chart 3 and, we examine the lC decay profile for the two factors we considered before,
namely 12 month momentum as well as consensus recommendation.
Chart 3: Twelve month momentum for S&P/ASX200 (lC decay profile)
tc
10 Oo/o
80%
60%
4.0o/o
2.O%
-o-u-/o
-8.O%
-10.Oo/o
Twelve month momentum has a strong signal with a slow decay rate.
Source: Macquaie Quantitative Research
0 Oo/o
-2 Oo/o
4 O%o
27 August 2004 11
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
... consensus
recommendation
Low decay = more time
to get set in stocks and
lower turnover
Success rates provide a
measure of factor
pefformance stab ility, as
do..
10.0o/o
8.0o/o
Chart 4: Consensus recommendation for S&P/ASX200 (lC decav profile)
6 Oo/o
4 0o/o
20%
o.o%
-2.0o/o
4 0o/o
-6 0o/o
-8.0%
-10 0o/o
Consensus recommendation has a very weak signal
Source: Macquaie Quantitative Research
ldeally, we like to see high average ranked lCs in the initial lags of an lC
decay profile that gradually decays as the lag increases (ie the lC decay profile
has a gradual slope down to the right).
\Mile a high average ranked lC in the initial lags gives us confidence in a factor strategy, a
low decay rate leaves more time to get set in stocks which expose us to this factor. However,
if a factor decays quickly, this means the information is quickly priced into the market and
hence becomes redundant, and so stocks will remain shorter in the portfolio Therefore, a fast
decay rate usually implies the factor's strategy has higher turnover.e
Some strategies, like earnings revisions, tend to have lower decay rates This is partly due to
autocorrelation in analysts revising their earnings estimates In particular, they revise their
earnings slowly while cautiously gauging markevconsensus opinion.
We also like to get an idea of the stability of the factor's predictability for each lag. We
therefore use two further measures:
1. Success rates for each lag of the monthly lCs
2. t-stats for each lag of the monthly lCs
Success rate for each lag: we use this in conjunction with the lC decay profile. lt is a
measure of the stability of the factor performance for each lag lt is calculated by dividing the
number of times the lC for a given lag was positive by the total number of months tested:
No. months lG > 0
Success rate = Total no. months in sample
ldeally, we want to see a succ€ss rate for a one month lag above 55%, say (if we are
rebalancing monthly) The success rate of a typical factor strategy will drop to 50% as the
factor signal is priced into the market.
n In fact, multi-factor models can be created by combining a signal with itself lagged in time. See Chapter 13 ol
Grinold & Kahn (2000) for more details
12 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
t-stats for each lag of
the monthly lCs
F actor autoconel ations
also provide information
about how fast a signal
changes
t-stats for each lag of the monthly lGs: the other metric we use here is the t-stat for each
month's lag. As discussed in the previous section, if the t-stat is above 2 for the first couple of
months, the factor strategy is a likely candidate for the final model1o.
Note the t-stat and the success rate are actually closely related statistics. As we increase the
lag of the signal the success rate drops down towards 50% while the magnitude of t-stat will
typically drop down towards zero.
One other closely related concept to lC decays are factor autocorrelations. A factor
autocorrelation measures how fast a signal changes (ie relative to itself). \A/hile a faster signal
for a stock will lead to higher turnover, which lowers performance, it will also lead to a higher
number of independent bets, which will ultimately increase performance. This is discussed
further in Appendix 5.
10 Again a t-stat less than -2 implies a strategy opposite to that which the factor is trying to capture As
explained in the footnote in the section on monthly time series of lCs, this might imply an opposite strategy as
long as there is an intuitive reason for the factor to behave this way The same comment applies to success
rates below 45% and risino to 50%
27 August 2004 13
Macquarie Research Equities - Repori The A-Z of Quant
Fractile portfolios are
formed by dividing the
universe of stocks each
month based on stock
factor scores
Returns are then
tracked for each fractile
portfolio
3. Fractiles
Fractiles are the next step in testing factor strategies.
Fractiles are the first portfolio simulations we use that test the efficacy of a
factor strategy.
Fractiles are essentially a ranking strategy that are generated by splitting the universe of
stocks each month into a number of equally weighted portfolios (fractiles) according to their
factor exposures.
For example, a quintile strategy would involve splitting the universe of stocks into five
portfolios Quintile 1 would have stocks with the top 20% of factor scores; quintile 2 stocks
would have the next 20% of stocks and so forth. Fractiles embody the idea that useful
information can mainly be derived from the tails of a factor distribution rather than from the
middle (ie for quintiles 2,3 and 4), where the potential signal noise is much greater. Fractiles
can be informative for both long-only strategies as well as long/short strategies
After each fractile portfolio has been formed, we then track the total return to each fractile
portfolio over the following month At the end of every month, we rebalance back to equally
weighted fractiles and then repeat the proc€ss. In this way we can calculate an accumulation
series (total return series)1t. In Chart 5 and, we again examine the quintile portfolio
performance for 12 month momentum and consensus recommendation:
Chart 5: Twelve month momentum for S&P/ASX200 (Quintiles)
0
Jan-95 Jan-02 Jan43 Jan44
Again, 12 Month Momentum shows up as a strong predictive signal.
Source: Maceuarie Quantitative Research
" Note that fractile strategies ignore all information in the factor exposures except for the relative stock
rankings They are naive factor portfolio strategies in that they do not take account of risk (be that factor risk,
idiosyncratic risk or other) In fact, they tend to be considerably more risky than real life portfolios and have
considerably more turnover
14 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quanl
Ghart 6: Consensus necommendation for S&P/ASX200 (Quintiles)
Jan-97 Jan-98 Jan-99 Jan{o Jan-01 Jan-O2 Jan43 Jan-04
Use a number of
fractiles relevant to your
stock universe
There are a range of
ftactile peiormance
sfafisflcs
Jan-95
The lack of predictabilig of equal weighted consensus recommendation also shows up
in quintile analysis
Source: Maquaie Quantitative Research
Note that if your universe of stocks is small, say less than 15, you may only want to perform
tertiles or quartiles (splitting the universe into three or four portfolios). On the other hand, if
your universe is very large, say above 100 stocks, deciles (10 portfolios) might be more
appropriatel2
Besides charting the fractile performances through time, we also generate a summary table of
return based performance metrics for each fractile. This gives us a better idea of how the
factor performed as a distinguisher of subsequent returns. The table also shows various other
statistics, for example each fractile's tracking error (active risk), information ratio (risk
adjusted active return) and turnover. These can then be used as a basis for comparison
across d ifferent factors:
Table 1: Twelve month momentum for S&P/ASX200
Quintile 1 Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5 a1-O5 (L-S) Market
Total return 22.82o/o 15 87Yo '10.75% 5.33o/o -10.14% 31.13o/o 8.78%
Active retum 1404% 7.O9o/o 1 97o/o -3.45% -1892o/o 31.13%
Tracking enor 7 98% 6.48% 5 33% 480o/o 14 19o/o 2O.O5To
lnfiormation ratio 1.76 1 09 o.37 -o72 -1.33 1 55
lstat (information ratio) 5.37 3 U 1.13 -2.19 -4 08 4.74
Monthly success rate 72.32o/o 58 04Yo 52.680/o 39.29Vo 34.82% 68 75Yo
Turnover 22.58% 42.94o/o 49.17o/o 44.28Yo 25.960/o 48 54Yo
Volatility 13.73o/o 10 28o/o 10.67% 12.90o/o 23.95% 20 O5o/o 12.57%
SharDe ratio 1 66 1 54 1 01 0.41 -o42 o7o
t-stat (sharpe ratio) 721
CAPM Beta (vs benchmark) 0 90 o7o 0.77 095 168 -0.78
CAPM Alpha 5.97o/o 4 OlYo 3.4loh 3 620/o 8.6070 13.25o/o
Twelve month price momentum is a successful factor. \y'Vith an information ratio
of 1.47 (and a t-stat ot 4.27) this result is highly significant.
Sou rce: Macauaie Q uantitative Research
t' On" cornron criticism of equally weighted fractiles is that they can hold positions in a lot of illiquid stocks,
too small for a typical investible universe. In this case, we might also want to calculate the market weighted
return for fractile strategies This will show how the strategy works for larger cap stocks within each fractile. In
fact, by comparing equally weighted and cap weighted fractiles, we can get an idea how the strategy works for
larger versus smaller caps For example, if all the equally weighted fractiles outperform the cap weighted
6 32 2.31 -2 13 -8 40
27 August 2004
fractiles, one could infer that the strategy works better for small cap stocks
15
Macquarie Research Equities - Reporl The A-Z of Quant
Table 2: Equal weighted consensus recommendation for S&P/ASX200
Quintile 'l Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5 Q1-O5 (L-S) Market
Total return 12.94% 11 20% 7 45Yo 14 22% 0 02o/o 12 29o/o 9 22o/o
Active return 373o/o 1 99o/o -1 77Yo 5 00% -9 19o/o 1229o/o
Tracking error 5 92% 4 650/o 4 75% 5 41o/o 6 48% 10 24o/o
lnformation ratio 0 63 0 43 -037 0 92 -1 42 1 20
t-stat (information ratio) 1 92 1.31 -1 .14 2 82 -4 33 3 67
Monthly success rate 6071% 54 460/o 41 07o/o 59 82o/o 33 04Yo 62 50To
Turnover 25.260/o 41 33o/o 43.55o/o 39 58% 24 35o/o 49 61V.
Volatility 15 00% 13480/. 1282Y0 1228% 1522% 1024o/o 12670/o
Sharoe ratio 0.86 0 83 0 58 1 16 0 00 073
t-stat (sharpe ratio) 1 01 0.78 -1 10 322 -543
CAPIVI Beta (vs benchmark) 1 09 1.00 0 94 0 88 1 09 0 00
CAPI\il Alpha 4 37% 3 50o/o 3 53% 3 91o/o 4 80o/o 7 70Yo
Despite the poor performance relative to 12 month momentum, consensus recommendation
is also less volatile, resulting in a comparable information ratio.
Source: Macquaie Quantitative Research
We now explain the various returns based performance metrics in the tables above:
Total return measures r Total Return = Annualised Total Return over period, Equally Weighted (for Fractiles and
the return to the Benchmark)
portfolio This also includes the long-short results where we measure the total return difference
between the top and bottom fractiles. ldeally, we want this difference to be positive and
rarge.
Active return measures . Active Return (Annualised) = Total Return (Fractile) - Total Return (Benchmark).
return in excess of fhe
benchmark ldeally, we would like to see the active return drop smoothly across the fractiles. For the
long-short result, which are measured relative to zero, Active Return = Total Return
Tracking error . Tracking Error = Annualised Standard Deviation of Monthly Active Returns
measures the standard
deviation of the active ldeally, we would like to see the tracking error drop smoothly across the fractiles.
returns Tracking error is also known as active risk.
lnformation ratio . Information Ratio = Active Return / Tracking Error (ie annualised).
measures the active
return per unit of risk For active managers this is probably the most important measure of performance versus
a benchmark. In fact, the information ratio is sometimes referred to as the Sharpe ratio
for active portfolio management. lt measures active return per unit of active risk. ldeally,
we would like to see the information ratios for the first and last fractiles above 0.5 and
below -0.5 respectively, with a smooth transition in between
The t-stat measures fhe o t-stat (tnformation Ratio) = Information Ratio /{N, where N = no. of years.
stati sti c a I sig n ifi c a n ce of
the returns ldeallv. we would like to see a t-stat above 2 for the lowest fractile and below -2 for the
highest fractile, with a smooth change in between.
Success rates measure . Monthly Success pslg = (Number of months with Active Return >0) / Total no. of months
the proportion of months
with a positive active Like the lC decay success rate, this is a way of assessing the stability or consistency of
return the factor as a return predictor. ldeally, we would like to see the monthly success rate
smoothly drop from above 50% to below 50% across the fractiles. lf all fractiles had a
success rate of 50%, we would not have any confidence in the predictive power of the
factor, as different factor scores would not result in different stock returns against the
benchmark.
to 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Monthly turnover
measures the amount of
trading activity
Volatility measures the
deviation in total returns
Sharpe ratio measures
total return per unit of
risk
t-stat measures the
stati sti ca I si g n ifi can ce of
the returns
CAPM Beta measures
th e co rre I ati o n betwee n
fractile and benchmark
returns
. Monthly Turnover = One way, with monthly rebalancing of each fractile
We don't want the turnover to be too high, as this incurs transaction costs and greater
market impact thereby reducing effective Alpha. A low, median and high quintile turnover
might be 20%o, 50o/o and 80% respectively per month. In practice, these would be
unsustainable levels but when risk factors are taken into account, this turnover drops
dramaticallyl3. We mainly use fractile turnovers for a comparison across different factors.
. Volatility = Annualised Standard Deviation of Monthly Returns
Otherwise known as total risk. ldeally, we would like to see the active return drop
smoothly across the fractiles.
. Sharpe Ratio (SR) = Total Return / Volatility.
Typically, the Sharpe ratio measures the excess total return per unit of total risk. As we
are comparing across fractiles, we are not interested in the cash rate, hence we can
assume it is zero. ldeally, we would like to see the Sharpe ratio drop smoothly across the
fractiles. We also calculate the Sharpe ratio for the benchmark
o t-stat (vs Benchmarkl = (SR (Fractile) - SR (Benchmark)) / Std. Err. (SR difference)
= (SR (Fractile) - SR (Benchmark))/ r2lN
lf the t-stat of the difference between is signiflcant, we can be confident our portfolio is
adding value in terms of excess return per unit of total risk. Therefore ideally we would
like to see a smoothly declining Sharpe ratio across the fractiles.
. CAPM Beta (vs Benchmark) = sensitivity to the benchmark total return, based on a
regression of Fractile Total Returns against the Benchmark Total Return (the regression
coefficient).
. CAPM Alpha (vs Benchmark) = y-intercept from regression based on a regression of
Fractile Total Returns against the Benchmark Total Return.
CAPM Aloha measures the non-benchmark related comoonent of fractile performance.
Using these performance metrics, we can easily filter desirable factor candidates from
undesi rable factor cand idates. esirable factors exhibit:
. a positive and significant annualised active return for the lowest fractile (and a negative
and significant active return for the highest, although this is not as necessaryto;,
. a low annualised tracking error for the lowest fractile (and high for the highest fractile).
. these in turn combine into a high positive information ratio (=2s11v" return/tracking error)
for the lowest fractile and high negative information ratio for the highest fractile. For the
lowest fractile a value above 0.5, say, is desirable, with a t-stat above 2 (for the highest
fractile an information ratio below -0.5 and t-stat below -2 is desirable).
. a low turnover is desirable in that it reduces transaction costs and potential market impact
(although a higher turnover potentially increases the number of independent bets).
Using fractiles, we can easily search for factors that help distinguish future stock
performance
Like monthly lCs, fractiles are part of our core factor screening process.
13 Fractile strategiestypically have significantly higherturnoversthan a benchmarked strategy, where stocks
positions are held relative to the benchmark weight. The reason for this higher turnover has to do with how
fractiles are constructed In particular a stock is either in a fractile portfolio with an equal weight or not lf it is in
the fractile one month, but is rebalanced out of the fractile the next month we would have to sell the entire
position (for benchmarked strategies re-weighting involves only buying/selling a fraction of the stock around the
benchmark weight) But the highest and lowest fractiles will typically have the lowest turnovers as they have
stocks moving into them only from one direction (eg while Quintile 1 will typically have most of its new additions
from Quintile 2 only, Quintile 2 will typically get most of its new additions from both Quintile 1 and Quintiles 3)
" Arquablv lonq/short funds are better able to utilise the information embodied within highest fractile portfolios
27 August 2004 17
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
M u ltiv a ri ate regresslons
can be used to control
for key risk factor
exposures
Pure factor return is the
return to a one standard
deviation exposure to
the factor after
controlling for all risk
factor exposures
Multivariate tests (pure factor returns)
As discussed above, we also perform a cross-sectional regression analysis on each factor to
ascertain the factor's ability to predict performance. However, we do not perform a univariate
regression on each factor, as it is unlikely to show anything different to the univariate tests we
have already conducted (rank lCs, lC decay profiles and fractiles)
Instead, we perform a multivariate cross-sectional regression each month, where key risk
factors are also included (eg size, sector and/or book to price)1s:
A pure factor return therefore measures the notional return to a factor after
controlling for key risk factors (eg size, sector and/or book to price).
Strictly speaking, the pure factor return is the return to a one standard deviation exposure to
the signal (factor) after the risk factors have been extracted (a risk factor being a factor that
predicts risk). lt is calculated by regressing the stock returns one month forward against the
relevant factor exposures of individual stocks the previous month. These factor exposures
need to be in a normalised form (see Appendix 2 for more details). They would include the
factor you desire to test (eg 12 month momentum or dividend yield), as well as your desired
risk factors (eg size, sectors and/or book to price). By examining the pure factor return of a
factor, we get a good idea of how a portfolio would perform if it was constructed around this
factor once risk was taken into account
The formula for such a multi-variate regression is as follows:
Returnl*1 = Fr fr + (pnrr fnrr + Fnrz fnrz + ,.. + Pnrr,r fnpr'r) + a
Where 9r = the pure factor return (regression coefficient) for the desired return factor
and 9*r' = the pure factor return (regression coefficient) for Risk Factor i
and E = Error Term from the regression
Once we have the time series of pure factor returns (Fr), we can produce some graphs along
with some performance metrics. Below we show two types of charts:
. The first set (Charts 7 & 8) demonstrates the performance over time of a one standard
deviation exposure to the factor, in this case prospective dividend yield. We do this for
both the raw factor returns (ie with no risk factors) as well as the pure factor returns
(where the risk factors are sector and size). The results are typical in that the pure factor
return doesn't perform as well as the raw factor return, because the returns to size and
sector have been stripped out.
. The second set (Charts 9 & 10) demonstrates the monthly and 12 monthly average
performance of the factor returns (for prospective dividend yield) over time. Again the
results are typical, with both charts showing qualitatively similar profiles, yet the raw
factor return performs better as the returns to size and sector have not been stripped out.
18
1s See Aooendix 9 for a discussion on risk factors retum fuctors and factors in oeneral
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Chart 7: Index of ASX 100 purc factor returns for prcspective dividend yield
Annudised pure rctum: 4.65%
Annudised tracking eficf:7 .73o/o
Pure lnformation Ratio: 0.60
Monthly Success Rate: 50.8
t-s{al (0):1.98
Jul-94 Jul-95 Jul-96 Jul-97 Jul-98 Jul-99 Jul-00 Jul-01 Jul-02 JuF03
lndex of ASX 100 Pure Factor Return
Soure: Maquade Quantitative Researdt
Ghart 8: lndex of ASX ,|00 raw factor rcturns for prospective dividend yield
Annudised raw rdum: 7.53%
Annuafised tracking efior. 7 .24o/o
Ralv lnformation Ratio: 1.O4
Monthly Success Rde: 63.6
tslat (0):3.29
JuLlX Jul-95 Jul-96 Jul-97 Jul-98 Jul-99 Jul-00 Jul-01 Jul-02 JuF03
lndex ofASX 100 Raw Factor Return
Source: Maquarie Quantitative Research
27 August 2004 19
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Ghart 9: Prospective dividend yield - ASXl00 pure factor return
't0%
9o/o
a%
7Yo
6Y'
5o/o
4Yo
3o/o
2%
'l%
0o/o
-2o/o
-3o/o
-4%
-5%
Source: Macquaie Quantitative Research
Chart 10: Prospective dividend yield - ASX100 raw factor return
10o/o
9o/o
8o/o
7o/o
6%
5%
4%
3%
2o/o
1%
0%
10%
-2%
-3o/o
-4%
-5o/o
Oo/o
-10%
-2oo/o
-30o/o
Example of tilting
towards risk factors
Sou rce: Macquarie Quantitative Research
Comparing these two sets of charts seems to imply that prospective dividend yield in the
ASX100 exhibits predictive power because it tilts investors towards sectors which have
outperformed. When you strip this out in the pure factor return the value add reduces a lot,
particularly during the early years of the sample period. However, even with size and sectors
taken into account, there still seems to be value in this factor, as the information ratio is still
06.
r--- Monthly (LHS)
-Rolling 
12mth (LHS)
Monthly
Monthly pure factor return and rolling 12 monthly return
r----r Monthly (LHS)
-Rolling 
12mth (LHS)
Monthly
Monthly raw factor return and rolling 12 monthly return
20 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
A range of statistics can The performance metrics in these graphs are described below:
be calcul
th . Pure Return (% pa) = the annualised return to a one standard deviation exposure to the
signal (factor) after the risk factors have been extracted
. Pure Tracking Error (%pa) = annualised standard deviation of the monthly regression
coefficients. Here the factor returns (coefficients) relate to the returns of a one standard
deviation active exposure, taking into account the risk factors. Therefore we are
effectively calculating the tracking error relative to the benchmark.
. Pure lnformation Ratio = Pure Return / Pure Tracking Error. This is similar to the fractile
information ratios we calculate.
Monthly Success Rate (%) = the proportion of monthly pure factor returns that are greater
then zero. We look for values above 55%, say.
. t-stat (Pure Returns Time Series). In this case we are looking for values greater than +2.
. Naive Return (%pal = the return to a one standard deviation exposure to the signal
(factor) before the risk factors have been extracted (ie univariate regression results)
. Raw Tracking Error (%pa) = annualised standard deviation of the monthly regression
coefficients. Here the factor returns (coefficients) relate to the returns of a one standard
deviation active exposure, without the risk factors. Therefore we are effectively
calculating the tracking error relative to the benchmark
. Raw Information Ratio = Raw Return / Raw Tracking Error. This is similar to the Fractile
lnformation Ratios we calculate.
. Success Rate 1%;= the proportion of monthly naive factor returns that are greater then
zero. We look for values above 55%, say.
. t-stat (Naive Returns Time Series). In this case we are looking for values greater than +2.
This should be similar to a t-stat of a univariate Rank lC test.
. Pure-Naive (%pa). \Mren greater than zero this implies the factor works better when
controlled for risk. \Mten less than zero. it implies the factor works better when there is no
control for risk factors.
. Pure-Naive Tracking Error (%pa) = annualised standard deviation of the difference
between the pure and raw monthly regression coefficients.
. Pure-Naive Information Ratio = Pure-Naive Return / Pure-Naive Tracking Error. This is
similar to the Fractile Information Ratios we calculate.
. Success Rate (%)= the proportion of monthly pure factor returns were greater than naive
factor returns We look for values above 55%, say.
o t-stat (Naive-Pure Returns Time Series). In this case, we are looking for values greater
than +2
ldeally strong statistics from this analysis are desired from the Pure Returns (%pa), Pure
Return Success Rate and Pure Return t-stat. However, statistical significance is a lot more
difficult to achieve after the risk factors are included in a regression. Instead, we use pure
factor returns on a comparative basis, selecting the factors with the strongest pure factor
returnsl6.
16 We might also test the efficacy of a long/short strategy after neutralising for sector or industry A common
method of neutralising for sectors in a long/short strategy is to include only those stocks in the long/short
portfolios that are ranked in the top and bottom third offactor exposures within each sector. The resulting short
portfolio will then have the same number of stocks as the long portfolio.
27 August 2004 21
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Summaising all of the
factor performance
sfaflsfrbs
The final factor screen
Each of the above described tests (lCs, lC decays, ftactiles, pure factor returns) shows many
of the different dimensions of factor performance. Once all the tests have been completed we
need to use them to select the factors that are most likely to work. The assumption here is
that factor strategies that worked in the past will continue working into the future17.
Given the extensive nature of these different tests, we found it easier to amass all the most
vital performance statistics for each factor into a simple report and then do a manual filter for
desirable factors.
An example of a summary sheet of factor performance statistics for Singapore is shown
below in Table 3.
Table 3: Summary sheet of factor performance statisUcs for Singapore (1995-2003)
Group Factor
AnalystSentiment Consensusrecommendation
Analyst Sentiment 1 month Consensus change
Analyst Sentiment 2 month Consensus change
Avg Rank lC
Lag 1m Lag 2m
2.5204 1.530/0
3630/0 4 09%
3.06% -1.77o/o
1.69% 2.18%
Hit Rate
Lag 1m Lag 2m
54.720/0 52.380/0
51.92% 51.46%
54.720/o 45.71%
52430/0 53.330/0
t-stat
Lag lm Lag 2m
1.17 0 73
1.52 -0.05
1.54 -0.94
0.65 0.88
Active Return
Top Bottom Top-Bottom
2.42Vo 2.39Vo 0 03%
7.5O% -7.O1Vo 14 51o/o
6.120/o -6.810/o 12 92o/"
-0.88% 0.29Y. -'t't7o/o
GroMh
Growth
Historic ROE
Prospective ROE
1 Month momentum
2.OO% 1830/0
0780/o 0 98%
51.89% 5't.430/o
52.830/0 56.19%
2.55% -1.780 4 320/0
2'13% -0 670/o 2.8O'/.
082
048
159
090
o37
Price Momentum 3 Month momentum
Price Momentum 6 Month momentum
4 35'/o
-3 85%
-24A%
-2.58o/o
-O.42o/o
50.00%
44.34o/o
44.34o/o
47.170/0
46.67%
49.52%
45.71%
48.57%
4.47%
-5.37%
-3.99%
-7 .660/o
-9.75o/o
-9 66%
-0.397o
3.'l8o/o
4.38o/o
5.670/o
I
-0.66%
-0.93
-0.16
-0.08
I
0.67
Group Factor
AnalystSentiment Consensusrecommendation
Analyst Sentiment 1 month Consensus change
Analyst Sentiment 2 month Consensus change
Tracking Error
Top Bottom
10.52% 10.77%
'11'l3o/o '11 12Y.
10 63% 8 68%
12.65% 13.79%
1A',t%
Information Ratio Monthly Success Rate Avg Tumover
Top Bottom Top Bottom Top Bottom
O.23 O.22 52.8Vo 42.5'/" '103o/o 27.7%
0.67 {.63 61 .5% 44.2Vo 67.20/0 67 60/o
0.58 -0 78 6230/o 39.6% 48.4% 5'l-4o/o
Historic ROE
Prospective ROE
1 Month momentum
FY1 Dividend Yeld
12.75%
11.28%
10.59%
't4.910/o 15.760/o
't5't70h 18.88%
0.02 47.2% 49.1%
-0.14
-0 06 57.5'/"
50.0%
48.1%
47.2%
20 5o/o
24 4'/"
39.9% 41.80k
31.3% 32.90/o
-U.U/ 21.Oo/o
I
14.8'/'
'l6.oo/o
o.23
0.2'l
49 1o/o
43 4%
50 0%
Price Momentum 3 Month momentum
Price Momentum 6 Month momentum
-0.30
-0.35
Highlighted are hctors that fit most of the criteria below:
. High and significant one and two month lagged rank lCs
. Well-distinguished active returns and information ratios for top and bottom fractiles
e Lower turnover for top and bottom fractiles
. Strong relative pure factor returns
We could therefore use these factors to build a multi-factor model.
17 Bearino in mind. of course. the Dotential danqer of data mlnrno.
Sou rce: Macquarie Qu antitative Research
22 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Building the model
Combining factors into a Up to now, we have focused on selection factors to go into the final model. In this section we
multi-factor model explore the process of combining these factors into a multi-factor model
Two-stage factor models
lnitially the factors are One innovative approach to model construction is the two-stage model building process Two-
grouped together stage factor models evolved from the idea that factors within each factor group are typically
more highly correlated than those that are not within the same factor group lt therefore made
sense to build factor group sub-models from those successfully screened factors belonging
to the same factor group. Once the factor group sub-models have been constructed we then
combine these into the final model.
Why? This two-stage approach in turn leads to:
lmproves . Increased model transparency: lt is easier to see what the weights of each factor
transparency... block within the final model are This in turn allows us to see what general factor groups
the multi-factor model has the most exposure to. For example, it would be much more
informative if we knew that the final model was weighted with 20% to the value block,
40%to the momentum block and 40%to the forecasts revisions block, than given the
individual factor weights.
.. and control o Increased model control: lt is easier to qualitatively re-weight factors within factor
blocks and factor blocks within the final model to take into account other practicalities.
For example, high turnover factors/factor blocks can be down weighted so as to reduce
the drag on the Alpha caused through higher transaction costs and market impact. A
factor or factor block might also be down weighted to reduce factor diversification risk,
and to make sure certain factors don't dominate the final mode
In Table 4 below, we show a narrow sample of some typical factors and their factor groups:
Table 4: Typical factors used in multi-factor models
Factor group
Analyst Sentiment
Analyst Sentiment
Analyst Sentiment
Forecast Revisions
Forecast Revisions
Forecast Revisions
Other Factors
Other Factors
Price Momentum
Price Momentum
Price Momentum
Price Momentum
Profitability
Profitability
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Value
Source: Macouarie Quantitative Research
Factor name
Consensus Reommendation
1 Month Change in Consensus Reommendation
2 Month Change in Consensus Reommendetion
1 Month % Change in FY1 EPS
2 Month % Change in FY1 EPS
3 Month 7o Change in FY1 EPS
Relative Trading Intensity (3/12 Month by Value Traded)
Size (Log Market Capitalisation)
1 Month Momentum
3 Month Momentum
6 Month Momentum
12 Month Momentum
Historic ROE
Prosoective ROE
ProsDective 12 Months Forward Dividend Yield
Prospec'tive 12 Months Forward Earnings Yield
Prosoective FY1 Dividend Yield
Prospective FY1 Earnings Yield
Historic Earnings Yield
Historic Dividend Yield
27 August 2004 23
Macquarie Research Equities - Reporl The A-Z of Quant
Ghart 11: Two-stage model building
Stage 1
Stage 2
Source: Macquarie Quantitative Research
The explicit steps in this two-stage model building process, as Chart 11 shows, are as
follows:
1. The first stage: involves combining all successfully screened candidate factors within
the same factor group into an optimal mix (ie determining the sub-model factor weights)
This optimal mix will take into account the correlation between these factors (see the
next section Putting it all together), ensuring we don't double count factors that are too
similar.
Once the weights of the factor group sub-model have been determined the sub-model
scores need to be calculated They will simply be the weighted average of the
normalised factor scores that make up the sub-model (the weights being the optimal
mix)18.
2 The second stage: involves repeating the above process but at a factor group level. An
information analysis on each factor group sub-model is often a good idea first, to check
the success of each factor group sub-model. Any factor group that does not satisfy the
lC and fractile performance criteria as documented above is excluded (this is not very
likely as the positive ICs for each factor within a factor group are indirectly additive)
The final model weights are then found by taking account of the correlation between
factor group sub-models. Once the weights of the final model have been determined the
final model scores need to be calculated. They will simply be the weighted average of
the normalised factor group sub-model scoresle.
One further point should be made. While the correlation between factors from different factor
groups is less likely, there will still be some correlation.
An obvious examole of correlated factors is between the momentum and forecast revisions
factors Analysts tend to upgrade their earnings estimates as the stock price rises (and
downgrade their earnings estimates as the stock price drops). On the other hand, stock prices
can also rise or fall on the back of changes in analyst earnings expectations. This in turn can
give rise to rather high correlations between factors within these two factor groups. In
Australia, some of the earnings revision factors have been over 75o/o correlated to three, six
and 12 month momentum.
18 To combine factors together we need to make them comparable This is because different factors will have
different scales and some may have units (eg market cap has a dollar unit, although yields and many earnings
revisions are unitless) By combining non-normalised scores in a model we run the risk of applying weights that
areeffectively different to the ones we intended Raw and non-normalised should never be used to build multi-
factor models So it makes sense to find a way to treat them on the same basis Normalisation achieves this
because it makes all the data unitless and have roughly identical distributions (with mean 0 and standard
deviation 1) See Appendix 3 for more details on how we normalise our raw fuctor data
1e Again, lt is important to ensure all the faclor group sub-models have similar distributions (ie roughly normally
distributed with mean 0 and standard deviation 1) lf we don't normalise each of the factorgroup sub-model
scores, their distributions will be rouqhlv mean 0 but not standard deviation 1
1. Form factor groups
by optimally combining
similar factors
2. Repeat fhe process
for factor groups to
create the final model
Finai Multi-Factor Model
24 27 August 2004
tac4uarie Research Equities - Reporl The A-Z of Quant
In Table 5 we present an example of a final model along with its core statistics (and give the
factor group suFmodel weights)
Table 5: Final multi-factor models
Factorgrcup Factor AW lC t stat (lC)
Value Prospecdive UBrElS Eamings Veld 3.7o/o 2.56
Vaiue Prospective FYI UB/E/S Dividend Veld 4.9% 2.61
Momenlum 3 Month Momentum 8.8% 6.02
Momentum 6 Month Momentum 9.3% 6.35
Momentum 12 Month Momentnm 8.7% 5 53
Momentum 3 Month Sedor Momentum 5.7o/o 4.46
Sentiment I Monh Revisbn of 1 Year Forward EPS 71% 7 01
Sentiment 3 Month Revision of 'l Year Fotward EPS 8.2o/o 6.30
Sentiment 6 Month Revision of 1 YearForward EPS 8.2% 5.73
other Eamings certainty 6.9% 4.o7
Other Prospedive |/B/E/S ROE 2.4ofr 2 43
Total
Source: Maquarie Quant'tative Reearch
Factor Factorgroup Actual
weights weight weight
40% 20% a%
600/o 20% 12oA
15% 40% 6%
25oh 40o/o 10%
4oo/o 40% 'l6oh
20% 40o/o 8%
30o/o 20% 6oh
35o/o 20% 7%
35o/o 2lo/o 7%
80% 20o/o 16%
20o/o 20% 4oA
lOOo/o
27 August 2004 25
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
We need to optimally
combine correlated
factors
to avoid double
counting and. .
. to avoid creating a
model that only works
in-sample
Soph isticated form ula is
used fo strip ourfactor
correlations fhaf uses ..
average rank ICs
... and average time
series rank correl ations
between each factor
Putting it all together
When putting a multi-factor model together, the issue arises as to how to optimally combine
correlated factors (or correlated factor groups)
lf we don't take account of correlated factors we run the risk of:
1. Unknowingly overexposing the portfolio to some factor types at the expense of others
(ie effectively double counting), and
2. Creating a sub-optimal in-sample model (see Appendix 4 for a discussion of in sample
model building and out of sample tests).
We therefore use a sophisticated formula that effectively strips from each factor's lC the part
that is correlated with the other factor signals (also known as orthogonalising the factors) In
particular, it adjusts down the lCs of correlated factors. Highly correlated factors typically will
get significantly reduced or diluted relative to the other factors in the factor group. The
resulting correlation-adjusted lC is then used as the basis for the models final factors
weights.
To determine the optimal weights of correlated factors we need two things:
1. The average ranked lCs of each factor/factor group over the in-sample period. This is
expressed in the form of a vector we label lG. Note that the average lC vector should
have lCs that reflect the investment horizon desired. lf you wish the model to be
rebalanced monthly, then monthly lCs should be used. lf you wish the final model to be
rebalanced yearly, then yearly lCs should be used. We discuss this later in more detail
2. The average of the time series rank correlations between each factor pair over the in-
sample period. This is in the form of a matrix we label p.
An examole of a factor Correlation Matrix is in Table 6:
Correlation matix Momentum Earnings yield Sentiment
Momentum 100 0% 55 6% 10 0%
Earnings yield 55.6% 100 0% -10 0o/o
Sentiment 10 0% -10 0% 100 lYo
Source: Macquarie Quantitative Research
Note that the matrix will actually be symmetric, with the diagonals being the correlation of
the ranked factors with themselves (ie 100%).
Once we have the lC vector lC' and correlation matrix p we can calculate what is known as
the correlation-adjusted lC for each factor. This correlation-adjusted lC is effectively how
much lC the factor individually contributes to the whole model separately from any other
factor in the model The correlation-adiusted lCs for a two-factor model are:
f C1' = (fC1 - pnzlC) t (1 - prr'],
lc2' = (lc2- p12lci t (1 - p122) el
where p12 = correlation between ranked factor 1 and ranked factor 2
Put simply, the higher the correlation the lower the adjusted lCs become On the other hand,
if p12 is zero, meaning the factors are completely uncorrelated, then the adjusted lCs for each
factor will simply be the actual lCs.
For an N factor case, the matrix formula for the correlation-adiusted lCs vector is20:
lC' = lCr. p-l
Once the correlation-adjusted lC has been calculated it is straightfonivard to calculate the
optimal weights of the model. Each factor's weight in the model is simply the proportion of its
correlation-adjusted lC to the sum of the correlation-adjusted lCs of all the factors in the
model
20 Equation (3) also be used to combine a signal with itself lagged in time (also see Chapter 13 of Grinold &
Kahn (2000) for more details)
(3)
Table 6: Factor correlation matrix
Avg lG
I 0o/o
6 Qo/o
40%
zo 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
The weights of each factor for a two-factor model then become:
wr = lCr'/ (lCl,+ lC2'), 
(4)
wz=lCz'/ (lcr' + lC2')
Using a model with these weights will give the optimal lC over the in-sample period21. There
is even an approximate estimate of the final combined lC, as found in Grinold and Kahn
(2000) lt is:
lCcomriu = ./ lgt. P'. lC (5)
lCs, final weights and estimate of the finalIn Table 7, we shovrl how the to derive the adjusted
combined lC for a t*o-factor model.
/ssues fhaf need to be
addressed include...
. negative weights
... adjusting the weights
via a qualitative overlay
... small weights 2
...large weights
Source: Macguaie Quantitative Researcfi
While this methodology is strictly correct in a perfect wodd, there are other requirements and
issues that can and do pop up when building multi-factor models We will now discuss the
more typical ones encountered:
Negative weights: a factor that ends up with a negative adjusted lC and hence negative
weight will usually be highly correlated with a more successful factor. The question then
arises as to whether to include the less successful factor in the model. One could argue
that the resulting combination of the correlated factors optimises the in-sample results
That is, the combination of both the more successful factor with a positive weight and the
less successful factor with a negative weight is more optimal than just the more
successful factor by itself. On the one hand, this souhds suspiciously like data mining and
would be against financial intuition, due to the negative weight.
On this basis then, we typically exclude factors with negative weights. This translates to
excluding any factor with a negative adjusted lC (see Grinold & Kahn, P270). For a two-
factor model this simply means (resulting from equation 2 above):
(tcr _ prz tC, > 0, 
(6)
(lCz - prz lCr) > 0
Small final weights: we also tend to exclude factors with final weights of less than 5%, as
they only marginally contribute to the final Alpha. For example if an individual factor has a
weight of 5% in the factor group sub-model and the factor group sub-model makes up
30% of the final model, this factor really has a weight of only '1 .5% in the final model. At
this weight this factor will have no significant impact. Equity markets will not work like an
optimal strategy in a perfect world, so there is little point in having small weighted factors
in the model or finessing the model to exact weights.
Large final weights: at the other end of the scale we may decide to cap the weight of any
factor or factor group. Typically we set this to 50%. lf we don't cap the weight of factors or
factor groups they may dominate the model, which is particularly dangerous if the factor
starts to mean revert, thereby threatening the stability and success of the live portfolio.
Capping the factors' weight reduces this problem and increases factor diversification
We tend to use capping only at the factor group level when combining factors into the final
model (rather than at a factor level). This is because factors within factor groups tend to
be reasonably highly correlated with each other; so capping one is unlikely to affect the
performance of the sub-model.
A qualitative overlay to reweighting factors: this can be applied to the model weights to
take account of higher turnover factors or higher turnover factor groups that will reduce the
" Again, notice that when prz = O, the adjusted lCs are simply the unadjusted lcs The weight of each factor
within the final model is then simply its lC over the sum of all the factor ICs
4
Table 7: Two-factor model building
Correlation matrix Momentum Earnings yield
Momentum 100 0% 556%
Earnings yield 55 6% 10o oo/o
Avg lG Adj lC Weight in model
8.0% 6.870 75 0o/o
6 0% 2.2o/o 25.0o/o
27 August2004 27
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
... using consisfenl
measurements periods
Ofher issues that should
be addressed when
creating multi-factor
models
Alpha (due to higher transaction costs) We do this by giving these factors less weight in
the overall model. This is an inexact step and is not possible to finesse.
5. Consistent measurement periods: care must be taken when forming the lC vector and
the p matrix in terms of ensuring the time period is the same for all correlations calculated.
This is most important for the lG vector as it most strongly influences the weights in the
final model
For example take a two-factor model. One factor might have 10 years of lC performance
data, where for the first five years the lCs were poor but for the last five years the lCs
were good. Another factor might only have lC history for the previous five years. In this
case it might only be appropriate for both factors to use the average lCs in the lC vector
over the last five years (see Appendix 6 for a discussion on Coverage), because the
correlations between the two factors will only be available for the last five years.
Once the weights of the factors within the model have been determined, we then can
calculate the scores of multi-factor model through time. However, there are a number of data
related issues that can pop up here:
1. Missing dominant factor scores: factors or factor groups that are the mainstay of the
model are typically required to exist in order to assign a stock a multi-factor score. lf no
dominant factor score exists for a stock it does not receive a multi-factor score. This is a
common reouirement that we make.
2. Missing nondominant factor scores: if a stock has data from the dominant factor but
from not all the other factors, we have two clear choices We can either assume the
missing facto(s) are uncorrelated and hence irreplaceable. ln this case it would be logical
to assign the missing factor a zero score. On the other hand we can assume that the other
non-missing facto(s) are reasonable substitutes for the missing one(s). In the later case
we would then rescale the multi-factor scores so that the model weight still adds up to
100%. Reality of course will be somewhere in between22.
For example, say our momentum group sub-model consists of two factors, a 12 month
momentum factor with weight 60% and a three month momentum factor with weight 40%.
lf a stock has no 12 month momentum data we do not calculate a multi-factor score for it
(as it is the missing dominant factor score) On the other hand, if a stock had no data for
three month momentum and we had decided to use the rescaling approach, then we
would scale the final score up to 100% by dividing the 12 month momentum score by the
weight of the existing 60% of the entire multi-factor signal (ie we would divide the final z
score by the block weight of all non-missing factors, Iz,w,/ Iq)
This rescale rule is quite logical when applied on a factor level within a factor group, due
to the similarity of the factors within the same group (especially if the factors measure
across similar time horizons) However it is more difficult to justify on a factor group level
due to the lower level of correlation between factor groups (ie the missing factor group is
more difflcult to replace)
3. Factor weight threshold: we may also require a minimum threshold of the combined
signal be attained before a score be assigned to a stock. For example a multi-factor model
may include three factors, with weights of 50%, 30% and 20%. lf the minimum
requirement is that we must have at least 75% of the signal, a stock that has a score for
the 50% factor and the 30% factor would satisfy the threshold but another stock with data
for only the 50% and20% would not lt would not receive a multi-factor score
For stocks with the minimum required threshold but not 100% of the signal we can do
either of two things: assign the missing part of the signal a zero score (indicating the
missing factor signal is not replaceable), or we can rescale the multi-factor score by
dividing by the final weight (in the 50% and 30% example above, this would involve
dividing the resultant multi-factor score for the stocks by 0.8).
22 ln fact, a third alternative is to rescale the multi-factor score only so much as the missing factor is jointly
correlated with the existing fuctors over the in-sample period This is, however, both compllcated, time
consuming and questionable as to whether this will make any substantive difference to the model, particularly if
most stocks have data for most of their individual factors
28 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
A good quant model
should offer ...
-.- a diverse array of
factors to protect
against some factors
not working.
... while still offeing
parsimony to avoid
over-fitting th e sample
data
It's a difficult juggling act
It is impoftant to
consider the time
horizon when
calculating factor
weights
Parsimony and diversity
The process of screening factors and building the model tends to wheedle out the less
successful factors. The final stage of the model building process is to examine both the
parsimony and diversity of factors within the final model Both parsimony and diversity are
essential in building Quant models as they offer further protection against data mining:
. Diversity: this requires the model to comprise of a number of qualitatively different
factors This is to protect the model against the possibility that some of the factors, which
have worked well in the past, stop working in the future. Intuitively, when one or more
factors are not working, other factors may compensate for their underperformance and
generate a smoother returns profile and hence lower returns volatility or tracking error.
Past analysis has shown that model diversity improves the Alphas predictive power and
consistency. One measure of diversity within the final model would be the number of
factor group sub-models from which the final model was built.
. Parcimony: on the othezfiand we require the model not have too many factors (much
more than 10 becomes questionable). Too many factors expose us to the risk of over-
explaining past results and relying on the specific combination of factors for the future,
which may or may not generalise beyond that period. Parsimony, therefore, may require
some factors to be dropped from the final model.
Excluding less successful factors within a factor group can often satisfy parsimony and
diversity, but sometimes it is not possible to have both. As mentioned before, it is difficult to
finesse the model building process but some attempt should be made
Note that if any factors have been added to or excluded from the final model on the basis of
diversity or parsimony, it is important to recalculate the model weights (using equation (3)) to
take into account the presence or absence of these factors (ie repeat the process described
above)
Time horizon
The model construction and determination of the final factor weights within a multi-factor
model as described above depends on the lC performances of individual factors, as well as
the factor lC correlations.
But factor performance may differ depending on the time horizon used (as we discovered in
the section on lC decay profiles, where some factors get priced into the market quicker than
other factors). Factors like short term earnings revision and short term price momentum tend
to be very useful in models for short time horizons as they have high short term lCs, while
value factors and medium term price momentum (6-12 months) tend to get used in models
over longer time horizon because they have higher long term lCs
The ouestion then arises as to what lCs do we use?
The way to deal with this in model construction is to use Rank lCs
relevant to your time horizon.
So, for example, if you wish your portfolio to be rebalanced monthly, you should use monthly
lCs (as we have described so far). lf you wish the final model to be rebalanced semi-annually
then Rank lCs over six months should be used
As long as the lCs are over the same time period, application of equation (3) above is
identical23.
23 lt is also arguable that instead of using a correlation matrix composed of the correlations between the factor
sional oairs. the correlation should be between factor lC oairs over the relevant time horizon
27 August 2004 29
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Sweet spot analysis (separate models for special
sectors/stock size groupi ngs)
Different stock In many equity markets, certain sectors act and react very differently to the rest of the market.
groupings can behave In fact, previous analysis by MRE has found most Quant models perform differently across
differently within different types of stocks. Here are some examples:
markets "' 1. Listed property trusts (LPTs) in Australia are a classic example. Stock prices for LPTs
are heavily driven by mean reversion but not by earnings certaing (as the LPT cash flows
tend to be very steady).
2. Infrastructure stocks are different to the rest of the equity market in that they are more
asset plays than earnings plays, with stable earnings expected to appear sometime in the
future. Therefore they are valued differently by the market.
3. We might also want to ca6duct lC analysis and fractiles across different size
dimensions of the market. This is justifiable on the basis of both differing liquidity and
differing amounts of reliable public information available to investors in the market.
... and separate models In each of these cases, it is usually justifiable to create separate models and by extension to
are advisable for these exclude these sectors from the model of the main equity market. Care needs to be taken,
stock groups so /ong as however, in two respects:
there is sufficient
breadth and it is not . That the breadth of stocks must be sufficiently large (say more than 10 stocks). ln order
simpty a data mining to be confident that the final model is picking up actual sector price drivers.
exercise . To avoid simply mining the data
As long as you are comfortable that both these issues have been addressed, it is usually
worthwhile exploring this avenuel
2n 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Various in-sample tests
can be peiormed ...
... but a critical
robusfness check is out-
of-sample testing
Testing model robustness
It is important to test the potential success of a Quant model strategy in an appropriate out-of-
sample period (see Appendix 4 for a discussion of in-sample model building and out-of-
sample tests). Model stabilig in different time periods is an important test in the selection of
a successful Quant model.
Before the out-of-sample tests are conducted, we may want to test the model has been
correctly constructed (ie within the in-sample period). We could perform the following tests:
1. In-sample information analysis: in addition to the run of the mill information analysis,
we c€rn also test the predicted lC versus the actual lC (equation 5 above).
2. In-sample multi-factor cross-sectional regressions: regressions can be performed
without risk factors or with risk factors (pure factors). To ascertain model significance we
require the t-stat from thTime series of model regression coefficients to be above 2.
This is a critical test of model robustness. To test whether the optimal in-sample model works
well in the out-of-sample period, we can perform the following tests:
1. Out-of-sample information analysis: again, this is a run of the mill test.
2. Out-of-sample multi-factor cross-sectional regressions: again, regressions can either
be performed without risk factors or with risk factors. An attribution analysis may also be
conducted to determine what factors performed well and portfolio factor exposures
through time.
Chart 12 is an example of the time series of regression coefficient for a multi-factor model
over both the in-sample period an out-of-sample period:
Charl 12:. Model rcgression coefficient
Factor returns to a regression of excess returns against a multifactor Quant model
Source: Macquaie Quantitative Research
Note that unless suitable reasons can be found, an optimal in-sample model that performs
poorly in the out-of-sample period should be rejected.2a
'o On the other hand, equity markets can evolve and change, which may result in some factors no longer being
rewarded as they were in the past. A badly chosen out-of-sample period, which only encompasses a fraction of
the economic cvcle may also result in model performance quite different to the in-sample period
E Regression Coefficient
- 
12 mth Avg
27 August 2004 3'1
Macquarie Research Equities - ReporT The A-Z of Quant
Portfol io con struction is
about maximising
returns while
constraining risk
exposures
Macquarie uses an in-
house optimisation
application
Portfolio simulations
The final step for any Quant model is the portfolio simulation. This involves both:
. Constructing investible portfolios (ie determining the weights of the portfolio)
. Performance analysis of the constructed portfolio in an in and out-of-sample period
(which includes examining turnover, transaction costs and market impact)
ln this section of the report, we will look at both of these issues, starting first with how
Macquarie conducts portfolio construction:
Gonstructi ng investi ble portfol ios
Portfolio construction methodglogy is a very important part of the whole investment process. lf
it is not done correctly your fdrecasts will not flow properly through to your final portfolio. A
construction process that severely distorts your security level forecasts is unlikely to add any
value or give you unexpected results. Therefore the aim of portfolio construction is to provide
the maximum possible expected return given the desired level of risk and realistic constraints.
There are a variety of ways to quantitatively construct portfolios if you have estimates of the
stock returns or stock Alphas (as a multi-factor model gives) In Appendix 7 we discuss
various ways in which portfolios can be quantitatively constructed
At Macquarie we use an in-house developed portfolio optimisation process.
The goal of optimisation within a funds management context is really straightforuvard: to
maximise the expected portfolio active return while minimising expected portfolio risk subject
to appropriate real life constraints. This involves searching around active weights space for
the optimal portfolio2s. In particular, we change the active weights of the porffolio until we
have a portfolio with the highest expected active return but the lowest expected tracking error.
To do this a quadratic programming algorithm is used.
There are four main inputs for this optimisation process:
. the stock Alphas (the expected active returns relative to the benchmark)
o an appropriate risk model
. an initial portfolio
. fund constraints (maximum active bets, target tracking error, sector neutrality, etc)
This last step is very important because the test portfolio goes much further than simply being
a paper model. A common criticism of Quant models is that the paper performance is typically
much better than actual performance, where transaction costs, liquidity considerations and
market impact due to fund size act as performance drags. A simulation that is as close to real
life as possible (using various risk, liquidity and size constraints) is therefore an important part
of testing the potential success of the model.
By using portfolio optimisation as our portfolio construction technique we can easily do the
following:
. Measure tracking error against all equity benchmarks
. Build portfolios that track benchmarks under a variety of constraints
. Build portfolios that maximlsing return while minimising risk
We will now discuss the required inputs and elements of optimisation in turn:
. Converting the multi-factor scores to an Alpha
. Dealing with stock and portfolio risk
. Performing portfolio optimisation
. Portfolio inputs and constraints
'u Note that we are considering here only active returns and active risk, rather than expected total returns and
total risk, because we assume the desired portfolio is an actively managed fund (it also avoids having to
forecast the exoected return and risk of the benchmark)
32 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quanl
Normalisation process
address problems
caused by extreme
outliers and a skewed
distribution
Formula for generating
th e m u lti -f a ctor excess
return forecast
Converting the modelto an Alpha
Once the multifactor signal has been calculated through time we need to perform a multiple
re-normalisation process to it (winsorising at t3). This ensures that the signal is well behaved
(as discussed in Appendix 2), otherwise very extreme values can have undue influence on
the final weights of the portfolio (the final portfolio weights in the optimisation process is the
most sensitive inputs the stock Alphas).
We can then convert this score into an Alpha using the following formula:
ALPHA = VOLATILITY x IC x SCORE
where
. Volatility is the cross-sectional volatili$ of the residual returns.
o lG is the strategy information coefficient, the predictive power of the model
. Multi-factor score are t{e cross-sectional scores for each stock, E q z;
Therefore we effectively scale the multifiactor score in equation (6), which is roughly normally
distributed, by the skill level of the forecaster (the lC) and the volatility of the residual returns.
The lC in equation (6) is calculated by taking the average lC of the strategy over the required
time period. The strategy is embodied in the multi-factor score, Zwizi,.In Australia, a $pical
model of the ASX200 might have an lC of around 10% in-sample.
The volatility in equation (6) is the cross-sectional volatility of residual returns. Residual
returns are the returns that cannot be explained by our risk model (which decomposes risk
into size, sector and momentum). At any given time cross-sectional volatili$ is constant but it
will change over time. Vvhile volatility is straightforward to calculate we typically assign it a
value of 30% through time, as it won't impact the optimisation process greatly.
The result of this simplifying assumption is that Volatility x lG simply becomes a scaling
factor to turn the multi-factor z score into an Alpha. In particular, for an average lC of 10%, it
is equal to 10% x 30% = 0.03. Therefore a stock with a multi-factor score of 1, indicating a
prediction of one standard deviation above the market return, would translate into about 3%
active return over the forecast period (relative to the benchmark). Similarly a multi-factor
score of -1 would translate to a -3% active return.
This will result in an Alpha that will be roughly normally distributed with a market weight mean
of zero and standard deviation of 3%.
(6)
27 August 2004 55
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Risk model includes the
stock variances and
covanances
Full stock covariance -
variance matrix ...
.. or risk factor matrix +
stock specific matrix
We prefer the second
approach
Dealing with stock and portfolio risk
Besides the Alphas, the other key input into our portfolio optimisation process is the stock risk
model. This is then used to predict risk on a portfolio level We express the stock risk model in
terms of an NxN risk matrix, where N is the number of stocks in your universe. This risk
model includes both the stock variances (the diagonal elements) as well as the covariances
or co-movements between stocks (the off-diagonal elements of the matrix).
By properly combining a risk model with the multifactor return model in an optimisation, our
portfolio will be exposed to our return factors without being unduly exposed to risk (relative to
the benchmark) In effect, we maximises active return while minimise tracking error.
There are two main ways to characterise the risk matrix:
1. A full covariance - variance matrix. This linear model involves the full history of each
stock's price returns. Bollf individual stock's variances and covariances between stocks
need to be calculated.
2. A structural full covariance - variance matrix. This linear model involves splitting risk in
two components. The first component is along various common risk dimensions also
know as risk factors. Risk factors are forces that affect groups of stocks26 Well known
risk factors are price to book and company sectors2T. The second component is the
speciflc or idiosyncratic risk of the stock This is the risk not explained by the common
risk factors.
At Macquarie, we use a structural risk model (the second one above). There are many
reasons why we do this:
o Structural models are a lot less cumbersome to calculate than a full stock covariance-
variance matrix
. Structural models tend to be a lot more stable and a lot less subject to estimation errors.
Structural models are an acknowledgment that stock covariances are driven by common
sources of risk/returns (factors) across securitles In other words, this approach
emphasises sourc€s of risk that have a broad impact across stocks in the market. By
identifying appropriate risk factors we can better characterise the total portfolio risk in the
future lt therefore reduces the dimensionality of the problem of estimating the risk
matrifs.
26 To get a better idea about how risk factors work, consider a portfolio that has a large positive or negative
exposure to a risk factor (compared to the benchmark average) By definition this exposure is more likely to
lead to returns that deviate more from the benchmark return, than a portfolio that has a zero (benchmark)
exposure to the risk factor In other words, if your portfolio has a positive or a negative skew to a risk factor,
your portfolio will likely have a higher tracking error (see P6, Singapore Risk Modelling)
" The key difference between a risk factor and a return factor that gets used in a multifactor model is that risk
factors tend to predict that a stock may be risky, which includes both upside risk and downside risk On the
other hand a return fuctor tends to predict the direction the risk factor will be risky in (i e either upside or
downside risk, but not both) Structural risk models are therefore like multifactor return models as they use
several risk factors in combination See Appendix 9 for a discussion of risk fuctors, return factors and factors in
general
" A similar approach, known as principle components analysis (PCA), also reduces the dimensionality of
estimating the stock variance-covariance matrix by characterising risk in terms of a small number of "risk
factors" known as principle components lt does this via orthoganalising stock returns of your universe into
many principle components (stripping out the correlated parts of each risk factor from each other) However,
typically only the first few factors to come out of PCA are used as they have the greatest risk explanatory
power. One of the advantages of PCA over structural risk models is that structural risk models will typically
involve risk fuctors that are often highly collinear, which can cause difficulties with structural risk model
estimation But the disadvantage is that the components from a PCA will not be intuitive and difficult to
interpret Hence,wehaveoptedtouseastructural riskmodel Interestingly,PCAtendstobeusedmorein
bond markets
34 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Look for a isk model
with overall explan atory
power > 30%o
Risk factors should be
meaningful and stable
over time
. Structural risk models are conditional models in that they can take the current risk
fundamentals (risk factors) of the stocks into account. On the other hand, historical risk
models (unconditional) give equal weight to the entire history of the stock's covariances.
. Structural risk models also have the advantage of estimating covariances for stocks that
have little or no historic data. To do this we only need to estimate the current factor
exposures of the new stock (using similar business and observable market parameters),
as well as an estimate of the stock's speciftc vanance.
. Structural risk models don't result in selection bias, unlike the full covariance-variance
matrix which requires the relevant history of data to calculate the covariances and
variances in the matrix.
. Lastly, structural risk models are able to cope with the case when a company's nature
changes, unlike a full covariance-variance matrix.
A well constructed structural risk model may explain up to 30-40% (the adjusted R2; of the
variation in cross-sectional returns of a universe of stocks, with the balance being attributed to
stock specific risk.
Like the return factors that go into the final Alpha model, it is important to select risk factors
which are meaningful, provide a useful proxy for other risk factors and are stable over time.
Risk factors need to be intuitive, gpically arising from recognisable investment themes.
Based on past research (see Balancing Fear and Greed, May 2000), our structural risk
models for each country take into account market factors/signals that are known risk factors.
These risk factors best capture the variation in cross-sectional returns. Some examples of
common risk factors we use are as follows:
. Size (log of market capitalisation): size has long been recognised as a risk variable
(see Fama and French, 1992) In particular, large caps, mid caps and small caps often
act and react differently to each other. For example, this may be due, in part, to the
greater level of stability large companies have over smaller companies.
. Sector: sectors provide perhaps the most useful proxy for commonly used risk factors
Stocks within the same industry face similar risks, similar Beta, similar volatility, similar
earnings yields (PEs), similar book to price and similar leverage. Thus, well defined
sector definitions eliminate the need for a host of these factors in a risk model (P8,
Singapore Risk Modelling).
Our risk sectors are partly based on GICS sectors and are specifically created to
achieve the greatest explanatory power of cross sectional returns, while at the same
time ensuring enough market breadth within each sector to ensure confidence in the
sector classification The number of sectors varies from country to country. For example
our Australian risk model has eight sectors, while our Singapore risk model has six and
our Hong Kong risk model has seven sectors29.
. Momentum: it is well documented that the momentum of stocks over the 3-12 month
horizon is auto-correlated (see Jegadeesh & Titman, 1993), which is a typical
investment horizon of many fund managers. So, besides being a return factor, we can
also use it as a risk factor (return factors are actually a subset of risk factors, which we
explain further in Appendix 8). There is also some evidence to suggest that sector
momentum and individual stock momentum are correlated (see Moskowitz and Grinblatt,
1999) but we have found the best explanatory power by including both individual sectors
and momentum as risk factors3o.
Other examples of popular risk factors are PE, book to price, and the debUequity ratio (to
model financial risk).
2e One of the main functions of GICS (global industry classification system) was to help mainly US investors
knowing what to invest in non-US countries As with most non-Us equity markets, the GICS classification
system is not necessarily the optimal classification system for domestic investors, but a good starting point
to BARRA risk factors are quite similar to ours For example they use size, value (eg book-to-price), momentum
and volatilitv
27 August 2004 35
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
To create a structural risk model, we first need to regress all the stock's factor exposures (in
our case size, the sectors and momentum) against the stock's foruvard returns (in excess of
the risk-free rate). This is done every month for the entire universe over the desired time
oeriod3l:
r"(t) = tx",(t).bs(t) + u"6; Q)
Where r"(t) = ex@ss log return of stock n (ie relative to the risk free rate). Log
returns are used, as we assume stock returns are normally distributed
Xn,i(t) = exposure of stock n to factor k at t (this is 0 or 1 if it is a sector, as
the footnote below explains, otherwise they are standardised cross-
sectional scores)
b(t) = factor return to factor k from t to (t+1)
u"(t) = stock's specific return from t to (t+1) for stock n This is the
component not explained by any of the risk factors
In the OLS regression we weight each observation by the square root of market cap, in order
to mimic inverse variance. Also, we constrain the regression to go through zero. This is
because of potential problems with multi-colinearity that lead non-unique regression result,
and also we want to explain all returns by their risk factors
This then gives us a time series of factor returns for each risk factor, as well as stock specific
risks. The factor returns then allow us to generate the unconditional factor covariance-
variance matrix, F. In particular, they are simply generated from calculating the co-variances
between the different factor returns. Note that because covariance of Stock A with Stock B is
the covariance of Stock B and A, F will be a symmetric matrix.
The time series of stock specific risks also allow us to generate the matrix of specific
variances, A. In particular, the diagonal (stock) elements of this matrix are simply the
variances of each stock's specific risk time series, Var (e). The off-diagonal elements, which
are the covariance's between all the stocks specific risk time series, are assumed to be
uncorrelated and hence zero. This, therefore, makes A a diagonal matrix.
And finally, the stock covariance-variance matrix combines these together with the current
factor exoosure as follows:
v=xrFx+a (7)
Where X = matrix of current normalised stock risk factor exposures (NxK)
F = factor covariance-variance matrix (KxK)
A = Var (et), the variance of the time series of the risk regression residuals, et,
where that €r =rt - I z;fi, (f; =factor excess returnS)
The first part of this equation therefore represents the common risk components due to the
risk factors, while the second part, A, represents the stock specific risk components Note
that because A and F are symmetric, V will also be symmetric3'. For a more detailed
discussion of risk and risk models please see Chapter 3 of Grinold & Khan (2OOO).33
In the next section we explore how we combine the Alpha model and risk model together to
construct portfolios.
31 Four further points about this are: first is that we use dummy variables for stocks within sectors. Second is
that we also force the monthly regression through zero otherwise we get nonsensical results This is due to
rank problems in the matrix calculations. Thirdly, if any given sector has no stocks in it for a given month, we
exclude this sector from the regression for that month Fourthly, we use Log returns and use a weighting of the
square root of market cap in the weighted least squares regressron
32 For the Australian benchmark S&P/ASX 2OO, this will be roughly a 2OO by 2OO stock covariance matrix
tt A bottle of Chamoaone for the first oerson to read this Call Macouarie Quant Team to claim your prize
JO 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Optimisation is all about
maximising the risk
adjusted active return
Performi ng portfolio optimisation
Wth both the Alphas and a structural risk model we are ready to construct the portfolio
through time We do this using a mathematical technique called optimisation Optimisation
allows an active manager to get exposure to quantitative views (as characterised by the
return factors), while minimising active risk (as characterised by exposure to the common risk
factors and stock specific risk of the risk model)
Portfolio optimisation works by changing the weights of the stocks within the portfolio until the
risk adjusted active return of the portfolio is maximised (subjectto the required constraints, of
course) This risk adjusted active return is also traditionally known as the utility function but
also goes under the guise of value add. Mathematically, it is defined as:
Value Added = Risk Tolerance x Portfolio Alpha - Portfolio Risk (8)
Or mathematically
ValueAdded=Aqp-up'
where op = q' hn, the Portfolio Alpha (active return)
and v"' = herV hs, the Portfolio Tracking Error (active risk)
and hA = ha, the active portfolio weights (relative to the benchmark)
and Ihn = 0, the constraint that the active portfolio weights sum to zero
(or equivalently the portfolio weights sum to 1).
\Mat is so neat about equation (8) is that it quantifies the trade off between increasing active
portfolio return, while minimising the tracking error. lt does this by using the Risk Tolerance
parameter A, which scales the Portfolio Alpha into a Portfolio Variance3a. This scaling
therefore specifies the fund manager's required tolerance to active risk relative to the active
return. Of course different fund managers will have different Risk Tolerances, depending on
their attitude toward risk, and their fund mandate. For example, a lower risk tolerance will
reduce the impact of returns in the optimisation, while a higher risk tolerance will have the
opposite effect3s. The default value we use is 0.1 (a typical value).
Note that implementation of optimisation can be tricky. The standard spreadsheet
functionality of Excel cannot efficiently perform optimisations with large covariance matrices
(for example this would be impossible for the 200 by 200 stock covariance matrix for the
Australian benchmark S&P/ASX 2OO).36
34 Most optimisers tend to use the risk aversion parameter instead of a risk tolerance parameter A risk aversion
parameter measures the aversion to residual risk and transforms the portfolio variance into a loss in portfolio
Alpha There is little difference between using a risk aversion factor and a risk tolerance parameter in an
optimisation, except equation 8 above becomes: Value Added = op - 1/A rfp2 That is, you convert a risk
tolerance parameter into a risk aversion parameter by inverting it (dividing 1 by I)
t' Note that mnstruction of portblios via the optimisation pro@ss will usually depend much more on the return
model than the risk model
36 The traditional approach to modem portfolio theory is the Markowitz-sharpe optimisation with respect total
return space This is used when managers are concerned about total returns and total risk, rather than by being
benchmarked to benchmark Here the portfolio active return in equation (8) is replaced with the portfolio total
return, (or w) the portfolio active risk is replaced with the portfolio total risk, tl,p'= w' V w, and the stock
(8)
27 August 2004
weiqhts add to 1
37
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Instead we use the in house Macquarie Bank Portfolio Optimiser. Using the Macquarie Bank
Portfolio Optimiser also has the added benefit of allowing transaction costs to be included in
the utility function for optimisation (ie Value Added = tr qp - qrp2 - Ts). Besides reducing
turnover, this helps to reduce the impact of errors in the forecast returns and risk model by
discouraging the size of positions taken in the resultant portfolio.
In the next section, we discuss some of the inputs and constraints the Macquarie Bank
Portfolio Optimiser can handle.
38 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Portfolio inputs and constraints
Constraints and One of the great strengths of our in house optimiser is the ability to perform simulations that
parameters that reproduce real market conditions and constraints The following parameters and optional
simulate real market restrictions (constraints) can be input into our optimiser:
conditions o select a benchmark (official index or customised benchmark)
. Select an initial portfolio
o Select fund size
. Select active bet size (eg maximum 3% overweighVunderweight relative to benchmark)
o Select a risk model
o Select transaction costs (eg 50 basis points). This can also be included in part of the
optimisation equation (ie Value Added = tr op - typ2 - T6)
r Select and modifu the risk tolerance parameter (eg to target a certain tracking error)
. Restrict short selling (ie long only)
. Restrict the maximum amount of liquidity traded in any stock at any rebalance date
. Restricting the number of stocks in the portfolio (including choosing the best N stocks to
track an index, including stocks not in the benchmark)
o Restricting the level of factor in a portfolio (including zero weights or market weights)
. Restricting the weights of stocks and sector exposures in a portfolio (upper/lower bounds,
or equality)
. Restrict oortfolio Beta
Note, however, that the more constraints (restrictions) that are put on the optimisation
oroblem. the more distorted the views on the stock's risk and returns will be.
27 August 2004 39
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Performance metrics
Performance analysis
As mentioned above, the Macquarie Bank Portfolio Optimiser produces the following output:
. The optimal portfolio weights
o The portfolio's total risk
. The portfolio's tracking error
. The portfolio's expected return
. The trades required to move to the optimal portfolio
. The transaction costs incurred when moving to the optimal portfolio
On top of this, it can produce the following statistics and graphs from a portfolio simulation:
. Portfolio summary statistics (total return, active return, tracking error, information ratio,
monthly hit rate, CAPM Beta, CAPM Alpha, Alpha T-Stat)
. Turnover/liquidity analysis (portfolio turnover, average number of stocks in portfolio
and percentage of trades not completed).
. Graph of number of stocks and portfolio turnover against time
. Graph of portfolio against the chosen benchmark
. Graph of monthly and annual portfolio relative return
Chart 13 demonstrates these types of statistics:
Chart 13: Summary statistics
Before After n
Costs Costs
Retum 10 1Vo I 4Y. 6
Retum 3.20% 2.5O'h
Eror 1 86% 'l 87%
ion Ratio 1.72 1.33
Hit Rate 68Yo 62Vo
Beta 098 098
Afpha 31Yo 25o/o
Tstat 522 425
a
^ RAA/\
,^f N ' " \fAAr4
"/ -v\fv v vw-
- 
Before Costs 
-After 
Costs 
- 
Benchmark
ll IIIII
Tumover {annual average - one my)
Number of stocks
'15
10
5
0
Source: Maceuaie Quantitative Research
70%
60%
50%
400
30%
20%
1 00h
00%
40 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Sensitivity to portfolio constraints
Besides performance metrics, we c€rn also examine how sensitive the portfolio performance
is to the various parameters and constraints of the backtest. Typical parameters varied in a
sensitivig analysis are:
. Maximum size of the active bets (relative to the benchmark)
. Size of the Portfolio
. LiquidiV constraints (the maximum amount of trading volume allowed for any stock at
each rebalance date, eg restricting change in holdings to 25o/o of average daily volume)
. Target Tracking enor
The following table demonstrates an example of sensitivity analysis we can do:
Table 8: Sensitivity analysis
Max Active Bet (rel Portfolio Size Liquidity
benchmark) (x $100 mln) Constraint (%)
Bet Size Scenan'o's
1.OOok
2000/0
3.00%
Liguidity Scenario\
1 00%
3 00%
I OOV,
3.00%
Pottfol i o s i ze s cena rio's
'l .QQo/o
3.00%
1.00%
3.00%
10 25o/o
10 25%
10 25./,
't 0 soo/o
10 50%
10 75./"
l0 75o/o
Alpha Tracking Information
Error Ratio
3.00% 't 480/0 203
4.25% 2't8% 1 95
4.63% 2500/0 185
3'12% 1 48o/o 2.'l'l
4 60% 2.63vo 175
3 '17% 1.47o/o 2.'16
4.64% 2*o/o 176
2.600/o 1430k 182
4.260/o 2 30Vo 'l .85
2.670/o 1 50% 1.78
3 75% 2.260/o 1.66
Hit Ratio Turnover
69% 470/0
69% 580/0
660/o 640/0
720/0 50%
73o/o 71o/o
73o/o 51o/o
690/6 73o/o
25'/o
25%
25'/o
250/0
30
30
CU
50
68%
66o/o
640/o
66%
8%
47%
33%
400h
Source: Maquaie Quantitative Research
Generally speaking the information ratio drops as
. the size of the portfolio increase
. the smaller the active bet
o the smaller the liquidig constraints
. the larger the tracking error, the lower the information ratio37.
tt The frictional costs of market impact and tumover have a detrimental effect on performance as fund size
becomes larger Managers of small funds have greater flexibility and can more freely trade a variety of
quantitative strategies, while larger funds are much more limited and tend to focus on lower turnover fuctors
like value and long term momentum. Past Macquarie research suggests that the ideal number of factors to
include in your Alpha model decreases with the size of your portfolio (see De Souza, et al, Jun 2002)
27 August 2004 41
Macquarie Research Equities - Repori The A-Z of Quant
Factor aftribution
\y'Vhen examining ex-post portfolio performance, it is useful to determine the contribution of
various factors to the actual return. Typically, the factors of interest would include (but are not
limited to) the factors that have been used to derive the Alpha The procedure employed for
the attribution involves using regression over each performance period to estimate the
market3s return associated with each factor. These returns are then multiplied into the
portfolio exposures to these factors, giving an indication of the contribution made by each
factor. This allows us to monitor those factors that are currently performing well and those
that aren't and the proportion of systematic versus non-systematic returns. lt may also identify
other factors that are currently significant in driving returns. In addition, it gives an indication
of the extent to which portfolio construction constraints and risk control are eroding the Alpha.
We can also monitor ex-post tracking error and compare this with the predicted tracking error
based on the risk model. This provides information on how well the risk model is currently
performing.
An example of some results from the attribution analysis is below for an alpha model. Here
the attribution is against the exposures of components of the alpha model (namely Sentiment,
Value, Growth and Momentum). The unexplained component in the pie chart is large, but if
size and sector (i.e risk factors) was also included in the attribution this unexplained would
drop dramatically:
Ghart 14: Factor Attribution Analysis
l$ntmenl
Summary of Atribulion Resulb
aValue !Growth I Momentum trUnexplained
Source: Macquarie Quantitative Research
38 
Typically, the benchmark is used as the universe over which the market return is estimated, however, this is
42 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repod The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 1: Addressing data
mrnrng
Data mining is a common criticism of quantitative models. Indeed, it is relatively easy to
search through historical data and find patterns that seem to exist. In this appendix, we
discuss the various ways we minimise the possibility of mining the data:
. Meaningful factos: requiring factors to have some theoretical rational based on the
behaviour biases that drive stock prices. This is the top-level protection against data
mrnrng.
o Avoid factor construction pitfalls: as described in Appendix 2, care must be taken in
constructing factors so that forward looking bias and survivorship bias do not occur.
Share dilution and financial year adjustments must also be made to historical data where
necessary.
. Factor parsimony and diversity: requiring the Alpha model to be both parsimonious (to
minimising the risk of over explaining the in-sample results), while keeping the model
diverse (to minimise the risk overdependence on the staple factors in the model).
. Risk-adjusted tests: making sure the factors we use in the final model still perform after
the risk factors have been taken into account (eg size, sector and momentum).
. Out-of-sample tests: testing the in-sample model in an out-of-sample period is another
top level protection against data mining. This is the acid test as to whether the model is
likely to succeed in practise.
. The reality test using real life constraints and conditions in portfolio simulations, such as
transaction costs, market impact and liquidity constraints. lf the model does not add any
value after cost then we can't be confident that the model will perform in the future.
. Sensible results: information ratios above 1, for example, happen only about 10% of the
time, while those above 2 occur only very rarely. lf a strategy exhibits a strong
information ratio, there must be an easily justifiable reason, otherwise we should be
sceptical (Grinold & Kahn, P339).
lf a model passes all these requirements and tests, we are a lot more comfortable with using
it in oractice.
27 August 2004 43
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 2: Dealing with data
In this appendix we discuss three important issues in dealing with data:
1. Data sources: where to get the data from
2 Building factor databases: exploring the pitfalls of factor database creation
3 Normalising factor data: how to convert raw data into comparable data
Data sources
To help construct meaningful factors various financial data sources can be subscribed to. At
Macquarie, the following data sources have been used:
1 The Australian Stock Exchange (for Australian market and financial data)
2. I/B/E/S (lnternational Broker Estimation Services) for consensus data (Thomson
Financial)
3 Worldscope for GAAP accounting data (Thomson Financial)
4. Datastream for market data (Thomson Financial)
5 Bloomberg
6 MSCI
Typically, the raw data from these sources need to be turned into meaningful factor signals
(which will require correctly matching each vendors stock codes and dates if the factor is
composed of data from across data sources). Factor construction is quite an art form and new
methods are continually being developed as markets evolve.
Building factor databases
There are a couple of considerations in the construction of any factor database:
1. Periodicity and the timeliness of data: typically, the shorter the periodicity the more
timely the data but the larger and more cumbersome the factor database. However,
monthly is a typical standard to start off with.
2. Matching across data sources: it is better not to create factors from across data
sources, as data vendors may have based their calculations on different core information
(eg one data vendor may have taken into account a recent share dilution, while another
may not have). lf you do have to match across data sources, the data will need to be
matched both by the listed entity (using either local market ticker or an international
identification ticker like SEDOLs) and by date (if it is a monthly database, then by month).
Care should be taken here, because if securities aren't matched across data sources you
could end uo with survivorshio bias
3 Survivorship bias: this arises when stocks included in the sample data do not provide a
realistic representation of stocks trading during the sample period. A common cause of
survivorship bias is the exclusion of delisted securities. lf a stock went bankrupt in the
past and is not in the database this potentially gives an upward bias to any results
derived from the database This is particularly problematic for momentum based trading
strategies. For example, a trading strategy based on buying long term underperforming
stocks looks artificially attractive if bankrupt stocks are excluded from the analysis.
Attempts should be made to retrieve as much accurate historical data as possible
5. Look ahead bias: it is imoortant not to create factors from data that did not exist at the
time For example, it takes typically 2-4 months after a company's year end for it to
release the results to the public. To calculate historical factors based on the company's
accounts for that financial year, based on information that wasn't available during those
2-4 months, will give upward biased results from factor strategy tests.
44 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Financial year adjustments: when using analyst forecast data to calculate factors like
earnings revisions, a forecast year rollover will be required if a company announces its
results during the revision period. For example, take the FYI six month earnings
revisions factor, where FY1 is currently 2006. This factor then compares the forecasts for
EPS in 2006 now with the EPS six months ago. But say the company has just announced
its results and analysts have just rolled over their FYI estimates to the next year, 2006.
This means that six months ago the FYI would have been estimates for 2005 Therefore
to calculate the FY1 six month earnings revisions properly we will need the FY1 EPS
data now (for 2006), as well as the FY2 EPS data from six months prior (which was 2006
six months ago). Thus, we ensure we are matching on the same financial year.
Diluting per share data: when using per share and price data and calculating return
data it is essential to take into account certain corporate events like rights issues, bonus
shares issues and share splits. The intention is to make sure investors are able to
compare like with like before and after the corporate event. For example, if a stock
undergoes a 1 :1 share split, the investor receives one share for each share they already
have. However, the DPS would have to be halved historically so that the total dollar
dividends received by the investor remains the same:
$Div = No*xDPS'*
= Npost x DPSpo.t
where Nposr - 2xNpo
andDPSpo"t-%DPSp-
By not taking into account dilutions, you potentially add unwanted noise to your factor
signals and incorrectly calculate the share's returns.
Normalising factor data
lf you intend combining factors into a Quant model, the raw factor signals need to be
comparable Raw data will have different scales and some may have units (eg market cap
has a dollar unit, although yields and many earnings revisions are unitless but all have very
different scales). So lt makes sense to find a way to treat them on the same basis. Two
common approaches are:
1 Ranking the factors scores: the resulting ranked distribution will be flat and therefore
easily comparable. Composite rank factor models are the logical extension of ranked
factors. Here the ranks of each factor are assigned a weight to combine into the final
model (if stocks are missing factor data it might be assigned the average rank scores).
2 Normalise the factor scores: we perform this in two steps. The first step standardises
the data to a mean 0 and standard deviation '1 distribution Note that this keeps the
original shape or distribution of the data. Then we winsorise the scores at +3 standard
deviations (ie any scores greater than 3 or less than -3 are set to 3 and -3 respectively)
Doing this decreases the severig of the outliers (skewness) in the distribution, thereby
making the data more normal (although kurtosis/fat tails may increase due to this
winsorising). lf no stocks were winsorised at t3 then we do not need to do anything more;
we have our final normalised factor scores. lf we had to winsorise any stock's factor
scores. however. we then restandardise the scores and re-winsorise. We repeat this until
we no longer have to winsorise the data. This repeated two stage process ensures that
any outliers will not skew or dominate any results we may derive lt also makes
combining factors into the flnal model very simple (ie by weighting the factor scores;3s.
27 August 2004
t' Notinq that multi-factor models should never use raw data
45
Macquarie Research Equities - Repod The A-Z of Quant
There are a variety of differences between the two approaches, the main one being that multi-
factor models assume a greater amount of information can be found in the tails of the factor
scores than the ranking approach assumes. On the downside, multi-factor models may also
aceentuate data errors at the extremes. However, tests we have conducted on multi-factor
scores versus composite rank models show they are typically above 8G-95% correlated.
Normalised data are also an appropriate form to perform regressions on, build risk models
withao and perform optimisations on.
Therefore at Macquarie we typically use the normalising approach.
There a few variations on standardising raw data. The way we use is a market capitalisation
weighted standardisation, rather than an equally weighted normalisation:
{tucton", -_l4ean_facter,"*)}
StDev (fuctor,"")
where Mean (factor.*) = the market capitalisation weighted mean of the required universe
We prefer to use a market cap weighted standardisation because most fund managers
benchmark against market cap weighted benchmarks. Market cap weighted standardisation
also has the advantage that it minimises data errors arising from small stocks. Data for larger
stocks are typically trustworthier than smaller stocks, so by using the market cap weighted
mean in the standardisation formula any aberration caused by smaller stocks is minimised
(which would have smaller weight)41.
Also, the universe of stocks that a standardisation is calculated over should match with
whatever portfolio benchmark is being used for the model. All stocks not in the universe will
have no factor score (alternately, we could use the mean and standard deviation from the
standardisation to standardise stocks outside the universe).
Note that at Macquarie, we have orientated our factors such that a higher factor score is
preferable to a lower one (the orientation being determined by both financial intuition and
historical experience). That is, we expect higher factor scores to result in a better
performance than a lower factor score. This makes interpretation easy In the event that we
find the opposite and can't explain why, we tend to exclude the factor from the model (in case
the factor starts behaving strangely or mean reverting).
a0 The standardisation process also allows the results of any multi-factor linear regression of excess returns to
be easily interpreted In particular, the factor coefficients (or factor returns) will be in excess of return units
Hence, the regression coefficients can be interpreted as what excess return you would receive if you had a one
standard deviation exoosure to this factor and zero to all other factors
o' Because we perform a market capitalisation weighted standardisation, the factor exposures of the resultant
portfolio will effectively be the active portfolio's factor exposures (ie the benchmark by definition has factor
exposures of zero)
factorr.rn"o = (1)
46 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 3: Return factor types
Factor types
In this appendix we briefly explore three of the more common return factors types used in
Quant models There are, however, many other varieties of factors.
Value factors
A cheap stock is preferable to an expensive stock, all else being equal. Market prices and
expectations tend to be more realistic for value stocks than for growth stocks, which have a
greater tendency to disappoint. \Men growth stocks disappoint, they underperform value
stocks.
Value factors can be constructed using prospective data or historical data (or both). Typical
historic value factors are earnings yield (ie 1/PE) and dividend yield based on the most recent
company data. Typical prospective value factors are FY1 earnings yields and dividend yield
using the consensus mean analyst estimates for FYI .
In terms of performance of value factors, less mature equity markets tend to have more
earnings volatility (ie analysts and market proponents are more uncertain about the future
earnings potential of listed companies). In these cases, historical value factors tend to work
better than prospective value factors. The reason is largely due to lack of confidence in
analysts' earnings and dividend forecasts, so historical yields are relied upon instead, which
in turn makes them stock price drivers. A good example is in Asian markets, as well as for
small cap stocks in the Australian market, where there is less analyst and media coverage
Value factors are also typically a highly autocorrelated factor. Historical value factors in
particular change only once a year while prospective value factors change slowly as analysts
change their forecasts. This results in less turnover for value factors than for high burn factors
like momentum and sentiment. Hence, value factors are a good counterbalance to high
turnover strategies in a multi-factor model, as well as potentially reducing the impact of poor
performance for periods when momentum and sentiment strategies aren't working.
Price momentum
Despite academic genuflection, markets are not efficient News takes time to get reflected in
share prices Turnaround plays take time to gain momentum and market popularitya2, while
darling stocks typically need a consistent sequence of bad news to become unpopular. But
when markets finally react to news they tend to overreact. ln fact, recent research indicates
that there is a whole life cycle to this process (see Lee & Swminathan, Oct 2000).
The evidence from many developed equity markets is that momentum works differently over
different horizons. In particular, share prices mean revert over the short term, outperform over
the medium term, and underperform over the long term Momentum factors are therefore
typically constructed over the short term horizon (1-2 months), medium term (3, 6 and 12
months) and long term (2448 months). Momentum factors are common factors within multi-
factor models.
o' Fund managers don't want to disclose long term underperformers among their holdings and are therefore
reluctant to buy, even if there is a credible turnaround story No one wants to admit holding stocks that invoke
neqative connotations.
27 August 2004 47
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Forecast revisions
It has long been recognised that analyst earnings revisions can provide a powerful tool for
forecasting stock returns. Changes in earnings estimates by brokers are a way of measuring
changing market sentiment and expectations of company earnings. These changes often end
up getting reflected in the listed stock price (although it has also been shown that analysts are
typically overconfident with their earnings estimates relative to what companies actually
report). Earnings revisions are often quite highly correlated with momentum and tend to be a
higher turnover strategy.
Typical earnings revision signals (derived from |/B/E/S analyst estimates of EPS) are
percentage change of earnings revisions for FYI over one, three and six months. Note that
the percentage earnings revision signal can be problematic when mean EPS is very small, so
sometimes price normalised earnings revisions are used instead.
Besides revisions based on EPS, signals can also be constructed from
o DPS: dividends per share
. BFS: book value per share
. CPS: cash flow oer share
48 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 4: In-sample model
building and out-of-sample tests
Whether we use a univariate regression based approach or a univariate information analysis
approach when constructing an Alpha model, it is useful to divide the time period in two parts:
1 an in-sample period from which the optimal factors of the period are selected and
combined into a model;
2. an out-of-sample period to test the stability and predictability of the in-sample model
The in-sample period can be before or after the out-of-sample period but typically it is before
and is longer than the out-of-sample period, so as to capture the significant drivers of a
market in a variety of economic and financial eras. The resulting model will then cater for
these different conditions allowing for model diversity and less reliance on factors that may
dominate in only one time period. For example, a long in-sample period in the Australian
equity market might be from 1990-2003. This would include the recession lows of 1991-
1992, exposure to the Asian market crisis in 1998, the last couple of years of downwards
movement in world equity markets from 2001-2003 and the general bull market from 1996-
1 999.
Of course, the prime purpose of the out-of-sample period is to guard against the possibility of
data mining. lf the out-of-sample results are substantially different to the in-sample results,
then it is difficult to fend off criticism that the in-sample model has been the result of data
mrnrng
The underlying assumption here is that the drivers of the equity market do not
substantially change from the in-sample period to the out-of-sample period.
Having said that, however, out-of-sample results will typically be inferior to the optimal model
generated from the in-sample period This is due to the weights within the factor model having
been optimised for the best performance during the in-sample period. But the hope is that by
building a model using the in-sample period we are at least capturing the most significant
drivers (factors) of stock prices in the equity market, and in the rough proportions according to
their importance so as to best capture future outperformance
Having said that, however, there are some problems with in- and out-of-sample periods:
1. Short out-of-sample period: the in-sample period is designed to capture the general
market drivers over most economic periods However, if the out-of-sample period only
encompasses a fraction of the economic cycle, it may result in model performance quite
different to the model performance in the rest of the economic cycle. In other words, it
may be the case that the drivers of the out-of-sample period are not well represented by
the best drivers over the entire in-sample period. A way to get around this might be to
have an in-sample period the same length as the out-of-sample period, which might imply
long in- and out-of-sample periods.
2. Changing and evolving drivers: given the requirement of a long in-sample period, and
hence a long out-of-sample period, this raises questions about the effect of the market
evolution and the value of factors that drove the market many years ago. In particular,
drivers of equity markets change over time and a long in-sample period may not capture
current factors driving the market. We believe, therefore, that shorter in- and out-of-
sample periods may be required, so as to capture more medium term and short term
autocorrelation in factor performance.
27 August 2004 49
Macquarie Research Equities - Reporl The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 5: Factor
autocorrelation
This test shows how fast the factor signal changes, hence the term factor autocorrelation. lt is
also a way to test the turnover of a factor and is calculated similarly to an lC decay profile. But
instead of comparing the factor signal with the lagged monthly return, we compare the factor
signal with itself lagged in time. So, while an lC decay profile tells us how fast a signal gets
priced into the market, factor autocorrelations ask "how fast does the signal change?"
Examples of factors that are highly autocorrelated are historic value factors like book-to-price
and dividend yield The book value of a company changes only once a year and the price
changes monthly for a monthly series. On the other hand, one month momentum (or one
month mean revision) has very low autocorrelation; hence it is a high turnover strategy
As stated earlier in this report, while higher factor autocorrelation will increase turnover, it will
also increase the number of independent bets being made, thereby increasing the breadth of
a strategy. This in turn increases the risk adjusted performance metric "the information ratio",
according to the fundamental law of active management:
tR = tc lBR
Therefore, in determining the weight of a high turnover factor, we need to balance the impact
of high turnover with maximising the number of independent bets.
Chart 15 and Chart 16 illustrate factor autocorrelation for the two factors we explored early in
this report, namely 12 month momentum and consensus recommendation:
Chart 15: Twelve month momentum for S&P/ASX200 (Factor autocorrelation)
tc
100.0%
80.0%
60.0%
40.lYo
20.0%
0 lYo
-20.0%
-40.0%
-60.0%
-80.0%
-100 0%
Although a slow signal, 12 month momentum changes more
quickly than consensus recommendations does
Source: Macquarie Quantitative Research
10 11 12
50 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Ghart 16: Gonsensus Fecommendation for S&P/ASX200 (Factor autocorrelation)
tc
100.00/o
80.0%
60 0%
40 0%
2O lYo
Q.Oo/o
-2O.OYo
4O.OYo
-60 0%
-80 0%
-100 0%
Consensus recommendations is a signal that changes slowly.
Source: Ma@uaie Quantitative Research
27 August 2004 51
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 6: Goverage
Coverage is important as it allows us to see how much data there is for each factor through
time relative to the whole universe. The shorter or sparser the history, the less confidence we
may have in the results we have derived (although this will also show up as less significant
stats in the lC decay profile and fractile analysis).
We calculate coverage by measuring how well populated the factor signal is over the period
relative to all the stocks in the universe that we are considering (eg S&P/ASX 200 in
Australia). We examine and compare this proportion both by number of stocks and by market
weight represented (the latter will typically be higher than the former, as larger stocks tend to
have more accessible information than smaller stocks).
Charl 17 and Chart 18 illustrate coverage for the two factors we explored early in this report,
namely 12 month momentum and consensus recommendation:
Chart 17: Twelve month momentum for S&P/ASX200 (Coverage)
o/o of All Ords
-- % Coverage
-% 
MKCap Coverage
31/01/1995 3110111997 31/01/1999 31t01t2001 31t91t2003
Twelve month momentum has reasonably high coverage through time, both by percentage of
market cap and by number. This gives confidence in the results we have calculated.
Sou rce: M acfl uaie Quantitative Research
1Oo/o
Oo/o
52 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Chart l8: Gonsensus recommendation for S&P/ASX200 (Coverage)
o/o of All Ords
lOOo/o
90o/o
SOYo
70%
600h
50o/o
4OYo
3Oo/o
2Oo/o
1Oo/o
Oo/o
31/01/1995 31t0111997 31/01/1999 3110112001 3110112003
Because analysts typically only cover the mid to large cap stocks, coverage for
this factor is not as high as for 12 month momentum.
Source: Maquarie Quantitative Researvll
27 August 2004 53
Macquarie Research Equities - Repori The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 7: Quantitative
techniq ues for constructi ng
investible portfolios
Portfolio construction methodology is a very important part of the whole investment process lf
it is not done correctly your forecasts will not flow properly through to your final portfolio A
construction process that severely distorts your security level forecasts is unlikely to add any
value or give you unexpected results The aim of portfolio construction should be to provide
the maximum possible expected return given the desired level of risk and realistic constraints.
We discuss below a few examples for long only portfolios (we present them in increasing
order of sophistication) :
. Screens: these are a very popular method. They are essentially a simplified multi-factor
Quant model in disguise, as they involve screening a universe of stocks for various
desirable characteristics These characteristics, however, use raw data, not
standardised data like multi-factor scores do.
For example, a screen may involve selecting all those stocks whose three monthly
outperformance is greater than 10% and dividend yield is greater than 4% (this is
essentially a simplified two-factor Quant model). Typical attributes used to screen stocks
are a combination of value factors and momentum/growth factors. By being exposed to
stocks which have both attributes you likely reduce the volatility of your earnings but
hopefully capture most of the outperformance Of course, attributes should be
quantitatively tested before being used as screens One might then either cap-weight or
equal weight the final list of stocks to form the portfolio.
There are some downfalls with screens. First, they will ignore the relative power of each
factor/attribute, potentially under utilising the relative information embodied within each
factor. They also tend to result in riskier portfolios with higher turnover. Lastly, equally
weighted portfolios based on screens may run into problems with liquidity and market
impact if the top stocks are skewed to small cap stocks (which is often the case)
. Stratification: this is basically screening along certain risk or return dimensions. We
give two examples, both using two different types of dimensions:
1 . Strata by risk categories only: one could split the universe of stocks by the two
commonly used risk dimensions, size and sector Sector could be split, say, by the
10 GICS Level 1 sectors, while size could be split into three: large caps, mid caps
and small caps (relevant to the country/exchange). This would result in 30 portfolios
along sector and size dimensions. Stocks could then be placed within each
category (or strata portfolio) and ranked by their Alpha Each strata portfolio could
then be weighted so that the stocks portfolio weight matches the benchmark weight
in that category (and perhaps taking liquidity into account). The resultant portfolio is
therefore designed to outperform the benchmark but has some risk implicitly in-
built.
2 Strata by risk and return categories; one could split the universe of stocks by
both their Alpha (return category) and by a risk category. lf the universe of stocks
was large enough the Alphas could be split into five equally numbered groups,
while the risk categories could be broken into five risk categories (eg not risky, low
risk, average risk, high risk, extremely risk). The combining of the Alphas five
categories and the five risk categories would results in 25 portfolio Wthin each
portfolio one could then assign a prespecified weight relative to the benchmark (eg
the low risk high Alpha category might be given a 10% overweight, while a high risk
low Alpha category might be given a -10 underweight).
Both the above strata methods will result in far better risk control than screens but there can
still be unintended risks the manaoer takes on
54 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Reporl The A-Z of Quant
. Heuristic model (linear programming): this is a level of sophistication above
stratification. Here, risk can be mapped along as many dimensions as required (eg size,
sector, volatility, Beta). The linear program then assigns stock weights relative to the
benchmark by taking into account their Alphas and these risk dimensions. You can also
program in "explicit transaction costs, a limit on turnover and upper and lower position
limits on each stock' (P396, Grinold & Kahn, 2000).
. Optimisation (quadratic programming): the goal of optimisation is really
straightforward: to maximise expected portfolio return while minimising portfolio risk
subject to appropriate real life constraints (which is precisely the goal of active funds
management). lmplementation, however, can be tricky The inputs for the optimisation
process are the expected returns, a risk model, the initial portfolio and the fund
constraints (maximum active bets, target tracking error, sector neutrality, etc).
Stock weights within the portfolio are then altered using a quadratic programming algorithm
until the expected portfolio return is maximised and the portfolio risk is minimised. From this, it
might seem that optimisation requires a great deal of inputs. This may mean a lot more input
noise and potentially sub-optimal portfolios. But as long as care is adequately taken with the
inputs, this problem is surmountable.
Comparing the heuristic approach against optimisation, the portfolio weights will obviously
differ but the more constraints put on either, the more the final portfolio weights of each will
tend to converge. This is because the number of unique solutions diminishes with the number
of constraints put on the fund (maximum stocks bets, maximum factor exposures and liquidity
constraints).
27 August 2004 55
Macquarie Research Equities - Reporf The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 8: Risk factors and
return factors
As discussed at the beginning of this report, factors are stock price signals. Factors embody
various forms of information about a publicly listed company. They could be characteristics of
the company, the company's share price performance or vital statistics of an analyst's
company model. As new information arrives and becomes embodied in these factor signals,
there may be an associated change in a listed company's future share price.
Factors therefore can be used to predict future stock price returns or future stock price
volatility. We call the former return factors and the latter risk factors. We will be discussing
risk factors first.
An active positive or negative exposure to a risk factor will mean your portfolio performance
will more likely differ from the benchmark portfolio than a portfolio of stocks with the
benchmark exposure to this factor. In this context, exposure to the factor could mean being
more exposed than the benchmark is or being less exposed than the benchmark is.
For example, take one portfolio composed of high dividend yielding stocks (which has a
positive factor exposure) and another portfolio composed of non-dividend yielding stocks
(which has a negative factor exposure). lf dividend yield was a risk factor (ie its performance
was associated with variance from the benchmark), then you would expect both the high
dividend yielding portfolio as well as the low dividend yielding portfolio to have a lot greater
tracking error than the benchmark portfolio. For an average dividend yielding portfolio, on the
other hand, one would expected much less variance from benchmark performance, holding
constant all other risk factors.
An easy way to illustrate this is by dividing stocks into fractiles and rebalancing them each
month, as described earlier. From the resulting time series of fractile returns, we can then
measure each fractile's tracking errors (ie the active risk relative to the benchmark). To
illustrate this, we have done this for a variety of factors:
Chart 19: Tracking error across the quintile for S&P/ASX200
18.0%
16.0%
14 0%
12.OYo
10 0%
------ 12 Month Momentum
---*- 1 Month Price Acceleration
-EPS 
Growth
Quintile 1 Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5
80%
60%
40%
20%
oo%
56
Source: Macquarie Quantitative Research
27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
Factors that you can be confident will affect share prices (risk factors) are those that have the
greatest quintile smile. That is, if you have an active exposure within your portfolio to those
factors that have the greatest smiles, your portfolio is likely to deviate the most from your
benchmark. Of course, the factors we have selected here are factors that we have used at
times in various models, so their smiles are fairly obvious (especially EPS growth).
Then there are return factors. Return factors can often be risk factors where the risk of
deviation from the benchmark performance for a high positive factor exposure is to the
upside, while the risk of deviation from the benchmark for a high negative factor exposure is
to the downside.
In building multi-factor models, we seek to identify return factors. Essentially, we want to build
multi-factor models using factors that give us a better indication of which stocks are likely to
go up and which stocks are likely to go down. lf we use a factor that has high risk attached
but doesn't tell us which way this risk is biased (ie up or down), we reduce the probability that
the multi-factor model will outperform the benchmark but increase the portfolio risk
(essentially we add noise). In other words, we like to see skew to the upside for positive
exposures and skew to the downside for negative exposures.
To see an example of skew and non-skewed risk factors, we chart the active returns across
the quintiles of the factors we examined before:
Chart 20: Active retum across quintiles
1 5.00%
10 00%
5.00%
0 00%
-5 QQo/o
-10 00%
-1 5 00%
-20.00%
-25 QOYo
Sou rce: Macqu arie Qu antitative Research
Take EPS growth above. lt is an example of a factor we don't want to have in our model. First
both a high, negative exposure (Quintile 5) and a high, positive exposure (Quintile 1) have a
high tracking error, as we have established in the prior chart. In itself, this is not bad but in the
chart above the shape of the graph doesn't show any skew. In fact it is roughly concave,
meaning that both a high, negative portfolio factor exposure and a high, positive portfolio
factor exposure would result in underperformance relative to the benchmark. This factor
would be classified as a risk factor only.
On the other hand, take 12 month momentum. lt has a strong slope downward from Quintile 1
to Quintile 5. This strong downwards slope shows that for a portfolio with high, positive
exposure to momentum (ie those stocks that have performed well over the last 12 month),
there is greater chance of upside relative to the benchmark. Conversely for portfolios with
high, negative exposure to momentum (ie those stocks that have underperformed over the
last 12 months) there is a greater chance of downside relative to the benchmark. This makes
12 month momentum a perfect example of a return factor.
27 August 2004 57
Macquarie Research Equities - Repoft The A-Z of Quant
So effectively, the tracking error chart tells us which factors are associated with strong price
movements (by seeing how great the fractile smile is) and the active return chart tells us
which are potential return factors (ie skewed risk factors).
Using the active return chart allows us an insight into the type of risk of each factor (as
measured by the tracking error). lf total risk is roughly equally distributed between upside risk
and downside risk across each fractile, then the active return chart above will show random or
close to zero returns across the ftactiles. In this case the risk factor cannot be used as a
return factor. lf total risk is systematically unevenly distributed across the fractiles, then we
will see a slope for active return across the fractiles. In other words, net upside risk, as
measured by the difference between upside risk and downside risk, changes systematically
across the fractiles.
In summary, then:
r A risk factor is a factor where a large positive or negative exposure to the factor has
historically been associated with both upside risk and downside risk.
. A return factor is a factor where a positive exposure to the factor has histodcally been
associated with upside risk only, rather than both upside risk and downside risk (and
conversely a negative exposure to the factor has historically been associated with
downside risk only).
58 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Appendix 9: Macquarie's
information analysis and portfolio
simulations
Information analysis
At Macquarie, we are continually developing systems to better assist us in developing
sophisticated models of the market. The latest application we have developed is Info
Analysis. With short turnaround, we can test any factor on any dataset or data subset of the
market over the last 1f15 years.
We offer this across the following Asia Pacific markets:
Developed markets: Emerging markets:
. Australia o China
o Hong Kong . Malaysia
. Japan o Indonesia
o New Zealand . India
. Singapore . Philippines
. South Korea
. Taiwan
. Thailand
Info Analysis consists of the following types of analysis:
1) Univariate correlation tests:
. lC monthly tests (including rolling 12 month average and t-stats)
. lC decays
. Factorautocorrelations
o Fractiles (1-20)
. Coverage
2) Factor correlation matrices
In addition, we can also build you multi-factor models and run through these univariate
correlation tests.
Furthermore, we can conduct pure factor return analysis where return factors are purified of
their correlation with the required risk factors (at Macquarie we typically use size, sector and
momentum as our risk factors).
27 August2004 59
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Figure 1: The Macquarie Information Analysis Tool
t" Asia FW a MSC lAsia FW . Autalian FW
Analyst Sentiment
: Otr 1 tu1onth Rerrommendatjon Revis
: trE 2 f,r10nth Rec0mmendati0n Revis
, trE 3 [4onth Recommendation Revis
I trE E h'lonth Recommendation Revis
trE Equal Weightecl Consensus Rec
flf, Composite
EI Debt Protection
fif, Earnings Cenainty
E
save cort$rztim 
I
Load ftrf q
O- *O", 
I
t.Gr.'s.--." tr
T.rtil.5.--..r tr
rr...il. Br..t".i.u E
t.:t.r Grr..rt. (Hrrrf lrl
ltu (Hrrtllrl
lC Or<rr PrrfiL
f .ct.r ArtrGrrr.l.airr
tr..rilE (irGlrar Trrrrt.rJ
t.crrr lG E.trit
JJ
E
E
E
E
!
tr
| : g@ Composite Earnings Cefiaint/ (5
i : [@ Composite Earnings Certainty (5
| : g@ Composite: 50% FY1 and 50% F
i : trE FY1 : NextYear Forecast Normali
I I EE FY2: Second Year F0recast Norrr
E EI Financial Data
E fif, Forecast Revisions
E Ell Growth
E EE Indexweiqht
E flfl other Factors
H g[! rrice Momentum
E fift Profiiability
E gf, vatue
tcD,.{rPr!til4M.xio{hL{r
MirinoNr Strcbrar Frrctil*
Minihkfl! StE.k
Gororol ExlroSdL Critoric
E{wll/HktW,iqIrad
PqtSOtirdoxcrJolere-r
Fill tf, Li^t.,xl.rtt.,*aa.n.l fila
o..r.... i lroi{bd(parrtq
,^ n E ro*bodr
r sDg! tbfiboa{ trail.td!5
IEI ate c.ait
t0
tt
+
t6 l
17 l
f
t+
?t
22l
24 I
View Insert Formdt Toos qdta Active Link Window QadUtilities llelp lalculations Iless
2g
e3
30
Source: Macouarie Quantitative Research
3)
{2
{0
4t
Portfolio simulations
With the use of the Macquarie Bank Portfolio Optimiser we can simulate real portfolios, with
liquidity and risk constraints that give the following statistics and graphs:
. Portfolio summary statistics (total return, active return, tracking error, information ratio,
monthly hit rate, CAPM Beta, CAPM Alpha, Alpha tstat)
. Turnover/liquidity analysis (portfolio turnover, average number of stocks in portfolio
and percentage of trades not completed)
. Graph of number of stocks and portfolio turnover against time
. Graph of portfolio against the chosen benchmark
. Graph of monthly and annual portfolio relative return
OU 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
References
Bird, N., "singapore Risk Modelling", Macquaie Research Equities (Aug 2002)
Fama, E. and French, K., "The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns", The Joumal of
Finance, vol 47, no.2, Jun 1992, pp427465
Farrell, J., "Portfolio Management: Theory and Applications" (1995), McGraw-Hill
Grinold, R. and Kahn, R., "Active Portfolio Management', 2nd edition (2OOO), McGraw-Hill
Gujarati, D., "Basic Econometrics", 4h edition (2003), McGraw-Hill
Haugen, R. and Baker, N , "Commonality in the determinants of expected stock returns", Ihe
Journal of Financial Economics, vol 41, 1996, pp407439
Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S., "Return to Buying \Mnners and Selling Loser: lmplications for
Stock Market Efficiency', The Joumal of Finance, vol 48, March 1993, pp. 65-91
Lee, C and Swaminathan, B., "The effect of trading volumes and price momentum", The
Journal of Finance, vol 55 Oct 2000
Alexander, C., "Market Models: A guide to Financial Data Analysis", (2001), Wley
Platt, G., "Balancing Fear & Greed" , Macquarie Research Equities (May 2000)
Platt, G., "Stress Testing Quantitative Portfolios", Macquarie Research Equities (July 2000)
de Souza, R., Platt, G. & Bird, N. "Quant weighting for your size", Macquaie Research
Equities (June 2002)
27 August 2004 61
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
Notes
62 27 August 2004
Macquarie Research Equities - Report The A-Z of Quant
lmportant disclosures:
Recommendation definitions
MRE Australia/New Zealand
Outoerbrm - return >5% in excess of
benchmark retum (>2.5% in excess for listed
property trusts)
Neutral - retum within 5% of benchmark
return (within 2 5% for listed property trusts)
Undemerform - return >5% below benchmark
retum (>2.5% belo,v for listed property trusts)
MRE Asia
Outperform - return >10% relative to US cash
return
Neutral - retum within 10% of US cash retum
UnderDerficrm - retum <10% relative to US
cash retum
Long term - 12 months to 2 years
Short term - 3 to 12 months
Volatility index defi nition"
This is calculated from the volatility of historic
price movements.
Very high-highest risk - Stock should be
expected to move up or down 60-100% in a
year - investors should be aware this stock is
highly speculative.
High - stock should be expected to move up
or down at least 40-60% in a year - investors
should be aware this stock could be
soeculative.
Medium - stock should be exoected to move
up or down at least 30-40% in a year.
Low-medium - stock should be expected to
move up or down at least 2$30% in a year.
Low - stock should be expected to move up
or down at least 1$25% in a year.
* Applicable to Australian/Nz stocks only
MRE adjusted profit definition
The MRE adjusted profit number is pre-
goodwill amortisation and pre-individually
significant items, that is:
Adjusted profit = net profit - individually
significant items + tax on individually
significant items - preference dividends -
minority interests + goodwill amortisation
Analyst Certification: The views expressed in this research accurately reflect the personal views of the analyst(s) about the subject securities or
issuers and no part of the compensation of the analyst(s) was, is, or will be directly or indirectly related to the inclusion of specific recommendations or
views in this research. The analyst principally responsible for the preparation of this research receives compensation based on Macquarie Group's
overall revenues, including investment banking revenues
Disclaimers: Macquarie Securities (Australia) Ltd; Macquarie Europe Ltd; Macquarie Securities (USA) Inc; Macquarie Securities Ltd; Macquarie
Securities (Singapore) Pte Ltd; and Macquarie Equities New Zealand Ltd are not authorised deposit-taking institutions for the purposes of the Banking
Act 1959 (Commonwealth of Australia), and their obligations do not represent deposits or other liabilities of Macquarie Bank Ltd ABN 46 008 583 542
Macquarie Bank Limited provides a guarantee to the Monetary Authority of Singapore in respect of Macquarie Securities (Singapore) Pte Ltd for up to
SGD25mundertheSecuritiesandFuturesAct200l MacquarieBankLtddoesnototherwiseguaranteeorprovideassuranceinrespectofthe
obligations of any of the above mentioned entities This research has been prepared for the general use of the wholesale clients of Macquarie Bank Ltd
and its wholly-owned subsidiaries (the "Macquarie Group') and must not be copied, either in whole or in part, or distributed to any other person lf yo-
are not the intended recipient you must not use or disclose the information in this research in any way Nothing in this research shall be construed as a
solicitation to buy or sell any security or product, or to engage in or refrain from engaging in any transaction In preparing this research, we did not take
into account the investment objectives, financial situation and particular needs of the reader Before making an investment decision on the basis of this
research, the reader needs to consider, with or without the assistance of an adviser, whether the advice is appropriate in light of their particular
investmentneeds,objectivesandfinancial circumstances Therearerisksinvolvedinsecuritiestrading Thepriceofsecuritiescananddoesfluctuate,
andanindividual securitymayevenbecomevalueless International investorsareremindedoftheadditional risksinherentininternational investments,
such as currency fluctuations and international stock market or economic mnditions, which may adversely affect the value of the investment This
research is based on information obtained from sources believed to be reliable but we do not make any representation or warranty that it is accurate,
complete or up to date We accept no obligation to correct or update the information or opinions in it Opinions expressed are subject to change without
notice No member of the Macquarie Group accepts any liability whatsoever for any direct, indirect, consequential or other loss arising from any use of
this research and/or further communication in relation to this research This research has been issued and distributed by Macquarie Securities
(Australia) Ltd (AFSL Licence No. 238947\ in Australia, a participating organisation of the Australian Stock Exchange; Macquarie Equities New Zealand
Ltd in New Zealand, a licensed sharebroker and member of the New Zealand Stock Exchange; Macquarie Europe Ltd in the United Kingdom, which is
authorisedandregulatedbytheFinancial ServicesAuthority(No 193905); MacquarieSecuritiesLtdinHongKong,whichislicensedandregulatedby
the Securities and Futures Commission and Macquarie Securities (Singapore) Pte Ltd (Company Registration Number: 198702912C) in Singapore, a
Capital Markets Services licence holder under the Securities and Futures Act to deal in securities and provide custodial services in Singapore Clients
should contact analysts at, and execute transactions through, a Macquarie Group entity in their home jurisdiction unless governing law permits
otherwise This research may be distributed in the United States only to major institutional investors Macquarie Securities (USA) Inc., which is a
member of the NASD, accepts responsibility for the content of each research report prepared by one of its non-US affiliates when the research report is
distributed in the United States by Macquarie Securities (USA) Inc Any US person receiving this research who wishes to effect transactions in any
securities discussed in this research should contact Macquarie Securities (USA) Inc and not any other Macquarie Group entity that may have prepared
this research. Disclosures with respect to the issuers, if any, mentioned in this research are available at www macquarie com au/research/disclosures
@ Macouarie Grouo
Auckland
Tel: (649) 377 6433
Bangkok
Tel: (662)2632888
Hong Kong
Tel: (852) 2823 3588
Jakarta
Tel: (6221)515 1818
Kuala Lumpur
Tel. (60 3) 2166 8803
London
rel: (44 20) 7065 2000
Manila
Tel: (63 2) 840 8885
Melbourne
Tel: (613) 9635 8139
Munich
Tel: (48 89) 290530
New York
Tel: (1 212) 548 6500
Perth
Tel: (618) 92240888
Seoul
Tel: (82 2)37058788
Shanghai
Tel: (86 21) 6841 3355
Singapore
Tel: (65) 6539 7700
Sydney
Tel: (612) 82329555
Taipei
Tel: (8862)27347500
Tokyo
Tel: (81 3) 5210 1400
Wellington
Tel: (644) 498 2800
Available to clients on the world wide web at www.macquarie.com/research and through Thomson Financial, Reuters and Bloomberg
27 August 2004
Feedback
David Rickards
Head of Equities Research
(852) 2913 8834
John O'Connell
Head of Equities Research, Australia
(6121 82327544
Adrian Faure
Head of Equities Research, Asia
(852) 2846 8559
Consumer Staples
Food & Beverages
Callum Bramah
Greg Dring
Andrew Kova6
Consumer Discretionary
Autocomponents
Greg Dring
Tourism & Leisure
Michael Petschler
Steve Wheen
Media
Stephen Freundlich (New Zealand)
David Gibson (New York)
Andrew Levy
Michael Petschler
Alex Pollak
Retailing
Warren Doak (New Zealand)
Andrew Kova6
Ron Sargeant
Michael Young
Energy
Andrew Blakely
Jodie Phillips
Financials
(612) 8232 8531
(612) 8232 9692
Transportation - Airlines
Sam Catalano
Paul Huxford
lan lvlyles
Transportation - Infrastructure
Sam Catalano (612) 8232 6377
Waren Doak (New Zealand) (649) 363 1416
lan NIyles (612) 8232 4157
Transportation - Marine, Road I Rail
Sam Catalano (612) 8232 6377
Waren Doak (New Zealand) (649) 363 1416
Alex Nlilton
tai.\ a.a. a2ja Adam Simpson
i;;t\;r;;;;;; Pau'staines
iatz\ ezsz ctst Andrew wackett
Industrials (cont) Emerging Leaders
(6121 8232 4572
(612]'8232 4r'.39
(6121 8232 7781
(6181 9224 0867(612) 8232 7647
(612) 8232 3104
(612) 8232 4246 Quantitative
Nick Bird (Asia ex Japan)
Riccardo Briganti
Raelene De Souza
Martin Emery
Richard Lawson
George Platt (Head)
(612\ 8232 3142
1612) 8232 4089
(612) 8232 8388
1612) 8232 3147
(612) 8232 4391
(612) 8232 6539
(612) 8232 3104
(612]' 8232 4OO5
1612\ 8232 4130
(649) 363 1418
(1 212) 548 6553
(612) 8232 5165
(612) 8232 4OO5
1612) 8232 3172
(649) 363 1416
(612) 8232 4246
(612) 8232 6306
(612) 8232 6834
Paul Huxford
lnformation Technology
(612) 8232 3437
(612) 8232 4572 Sandra Kemp
Data Services (Australia & New Zealand)
Sheridan Duffy (612) 82329786
(612) 82327628Alex Milton
Materials Economics and Strategy
John Purtell
Andrew S@tt
Chemicals/Containers, Packaging/Paper &
Forest Products. Construction Materials
Mark Cotton 1612\ 8232 7782
Stephen Hudson (New Zealand) (649) 363 1414
(612) 8232 8633
(612) 8232 3114
Liz Dinh (Strategy)
Richard Gibbs (Head of E@nomics)
Roland Randall (NZ Economi6)
Brian Redican (Aus E@nomi6)
Rory Robertson (Strategy)
Tim Rocks (Equities Strategy)
Mark Tiemey (lnt'l Economi6)
Economic & Market Statistics
Daniel Been
Tim Bowring
Simone Larkins
Sales
(612) 8232 8423
(612) 8232 3935
(612) 8232 6934
(612) 82327016
1612) 8232 8569
(612) 82327562
(612) 8232 3121
\612l, 8232 8317
(612) 8232 3649
(612) 8232 3976
Global Metals & Mining
Wktor Bielski (London) (44 20) 7065 2140
Lee Bowers
Brendan Harris
Ben Lyons
Steven l\4ichael
John Santul
Sophie Spartalis
Real Estate
(618) 9224 0701
(612) 8232 3575
(612) 8232 4931
(61 8) 9224 0833
(61 8) 9224 0863
(612) 8232 5159Banks
Wlliam Ammentorp
Andrew Hokin
Stephen Kench
Ben Koo
Diversified Financials
Andrew Hokin
Stephen Kench
lnsurance
Tony Jackson
Deana l\4itchell
Healthcare & Biotech
(612) 8232 5096
(612) 8232 3296
(612) 8232 6089
(61 2) 8232 5989
(612) 8232 3296
(612) 8232 6089
(612) 8232 4442
(612) 8232 4576
Property Trusts
i/ark Cotton
Stephen Freundlich (New Zealand)
Richard Jones
Matt Na€rd
Anthony Shields
Rob Stanton
Head of lnstitutional Sales
Basil Mcllhagga (652) 2848 8055
Europe
Charles Nelson, UK (44 20) 7065 2032
Rob Fabbro Continental Europe (44 20) 7065 2031
Munich
Wlhelm Schrdder
New York
Luke Sullivan
New Zealand
l\ilick Carolan
Australia
Sydney
lvlartin Dacron
Melbourne
Duane O'Donnell
Asia
Hong Kong
Paul lsgrove
Singapore
Bernard Thien
Email addresses
FirstName. Surname@macquarie.com
eg. David. Rickards@macquarie.com
(612) 82327782
(649) 363 1418
(612) 82327148
(612) 8232 6948
(612) 8232 6308
1612) 82327786
Real Estate Management & Development
Andrew Hokin
Telecomm unications
(612) 8232 3296
(49 89) 29 0530
(1 212) 548 6507
(649) 363 1 404
(612) 82327421
(61 3) 9635 91 83
(854 2423 3728
(65) 6231 1185
Steve Hodgson (New Zealand)
Paul Hughes
Maras Wlson
Industrials
(649) 363 1415
(612\ 8232 5384
(612t 8232 5387
Steve Hodgson (New Zealand)
lan lvlartin
Gaurish Pinge
S@lt Ryall
Tim Smart
Utilities
(649) 363 1415
(61 3) 9635 81 37
(612) 8232 6846
(612) 8232 7124
(612\ 8232 4203Capital Goods
Mark Cotton (6'12\ 82327782
Waren Doak (New Zealand) (649) 363 1416
Greg Dring (612) 8232 3104
Commercial Services & Supplies
lan lvlyles \612) 8232 4157
Find our research at
Macquarie: wW macquarie com aulresarcir
Thomson: www thomson.com/financial
Reuters: www rbr.reuters com
Bloomberg: MAC GO
Contact Gareth Warfield for access G12\ 8232 3207
Commodities & Precious Metals
Stephen Hudson (New Zealand)
Gavin Maher
Ed Reekie
(649) 363 1414
(612\ 8232 415'l
(6121 8232 6844
Jim Lennon (London)
Adam Rowley (London)
Toll free from oveFeas
Canada
Hong Kong
Japan
New York
Singapore
(44 20) 7065 2014
(44 20) 7065 2013
1800 989 8159
800 96 2049
0053 161 6437
1Aa8 622 7862
800 616 1037
August 04
